Electrodermal response to auditory stimuli in relation to menopausal transition period. Cooperate or not cooperate EEG, autonomic, and behavioral correlates of ineffective joint strategies. Emotionally conditioning the target-speech voice enhances recognition of the target speech under "cocktail-party" listening conditions. The wisdom of the body: Listeners' autonomic arousal distinguishes between spontaneous and posed vocal emotions. Autonomic stress reactivity and craving in individuals with problematic Internet use. Music-Evoked Emotions-Current Studies. Cognitive reappraisal and acceptance: Effects on emotion, physiology, and perceived cognitive costs. Parent emotion socialization and pre-adolescent's social and emotional adjustment: Moderating effects of autonomic nervous system reactivity. Mistakes, Too Few to Mention? Impaired Self-conscious Emotional Processing of Errors in the Behavioral Variant of Frontotemporal Dementia. Alexithymia and emotional reactions to odors. Baseline Levels of Rapid Eye Movement Sleep May Protect Against Excessive Activity in Fear-Related Neural Circuitry. A case-control study of skin conductance biofeedback on seizure frequency and emotion regulation in drug-resistant temporal lobe epilepsy. Bodily Reactions to Emotional Words Referring to Own versus Other People's Emotions. Patients' autonomic activation during clinical interaction: A review of empirical studies. Regulating Anger under Stress via Cognitive Reappraisal and Sadness. Emotions alter muscle proprioceptive coding of movements in humans. Stress promotes generalization of older but not recent threat memories. Longitudinal Associations of Parental Emotion Socialization and Children's Emotion Regulation: The Moderating Role of ADHD Symptomatology. Autonomic responses to tonic pain are more closely related to stimulus intensity than to pain intensity. Affective and physiological correlates of the perception of unimodal and bimodal emotional stimuli. Bilateral Alternating Auditory Stimulations Facilitate Fear Extinction and Retrieval. Assessment of social transmission of threats in humans using observational fear conditioning. Psychophysiological and self-reported reactivity associated with social anxiety and public speaking fear symptoms: Effects of fear versus distress. Brain structural connectivity and context-dependent extinction memory. Pitch Syntax Violations Are Linked to Greater Skin Conductance Changes, Relative to Timbral Violations - The Predictive Role of the Reward System in Perspective of Cortico-subcortical Loops. Empathy in Negative and Positive Interpersonal Interactions. What is the Relationship Between Central (EEG, fNIRS) and Peripheral (Autonomic) Neurophysiological Responses? Negative appraisals and fear extinction are independently related to PTSD symptoms. Ostracism and physiological arousal following traumatic brain injury. Enhancing effects of contingency instructions on fear acquisition and extinction in anxiety disorders. Emotional intelligence buffers the effect of physiological arousal on dishonesty. Skin Conductance Responses and Neural Activations During Fear Conditioning and Extinction Recall Across Anxiety Disorders. Affective empathy, cognitive empathy and social attention in children at high risk of criminal behaviour. Attentional focus during exposure in spider phobia: The effect of valence and schematicity of a partial distractor. Embodiment and Emotional Memory in First vs. Second Language. Stroke of bad luck? Autonomic Reactivity to Arousing Stimuli with Social and Non-social Relevance in Alexithymia. Eye movement during recall reduces objective memory performance: An extended replication. Empathy, Einfühlung, and aesthetic experience: the effect of emotion contagion on appreciation of representational and abstract art using fEMG and SCR. Death anxiety and its relationship with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Facing two faces: Defense activation varies as a function of personal relevance. Abnormal fear circuitry in Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A controlled magnetic resonance imaging study. Threat intensity widens fear generalization gradients. Grima: A Distinct Emotion Concept? Fear conditioning and extinction in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder. Skin conductance as a pain assessment tool during chest tube removal: An observational study. Acupuncture decreases competitive anxiety prior to a competition in young athletes: a randomized controlled trial pilot study. The serotonin transporter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) and coping strategies influence successful emotion regulation in an acute stress situation: Physiological evidence. Callous-unemotional, impulsive-irresponsible, and grandiose-manipulative traits: Distinct associations with heart rate, skin conductance, and startle responses to violent and erotic scenes. Temporal stability of multiple response systems to 7.5% carbon dioxide challenge. Endogenous cortisol reactivity moderates the relationship between fear inhibition to safety signals and posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms. I know you can see me: Social attention influences bodily self-awareness. Physiological responses associated with cultural attachment. Diaphragmatic breathing during virtual reality exposure therapy for aviophobia: functional coping strategy or avoidance behavior? a pilot study. To each its own? Gender differences in affective, autonomic, and behavioral responses to same-sex and opposite-sex visual sexual stimuli. Relative Contribution of Odour Intensity and Valence to Moral Decisions. Oscillatory EEG activity induced by conditioning stimuli during fear conditioning reflects Salience and Valence of these stimuli more than Expectancy. What our eyes tell us about feelings: Tracking pupillary responses during emotion regulation processes. Stress disrupts the reconsolidation of fear memories in men. Salience Network Connectivity Modulates Skin Conductance Responses in Predicting Arousal Experience. Sensory-specific satiety: Added insights from autonomic nervous system responses and facial expressions. Go for broke: The role of somatic states when asked to lose in the Iowa Gambling Task. One-trial overshadowing: Evidence for fast specific fear learning in humans. Assessing fear learning via conditioned respiratory amplitude responses. Medial prefrontal cortex stimulation accelerates therapy response of exposure therapy in acrophobia. A pupil size response model to assess fear learning. Thinking anxious, feeling anxious, or both? Cognitive bias moderates the relationship between anxiety disorder status and sympathetic arousal in youth. Emotion Dysregulation of Women with Premenstrual Syndrome. Trauma-related dissociation: Psychological features and psychophysiological responses to script-driven imagery in borderline personality disorder. Hippocampal Damage Increases Deontological Responses during Moral Decision Making. Modeling the development of panic disorder with interoceptive conditioning. Multivariate Brain Prediction of Heart Rate and Skin Conductance Responses to Social Threat. Positive urgency and emotional reactivity: Evidence for altered responding to positive stimuli. Neural mechanisms of human temporal fear conditioning. Deficient fear extinction memory in posttraumatic stress disorder. Chronic cannabis use is associated with impaired fear extinction in humans. Neural correlates of appetitive extinction in humans. Altered Pain Perception and Fear-Learning Deficits in Subjects With Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Estradiol is associated with altered cognitive and physiological responses during fear conditioning and extinction in healthy and spider phobic women. Skin conductance reveals the early development of the unconscious processing of emotions. Negative affect, perceived health, and endocrine and immunological levels in caregivers of offspring with schizophrenia. Neural changes in extinction recall following prolonged exposure treatment for PTSD: A longitudinal fMRI study. Learned Fear of Gastrointestinal Sensations in Healthy Adults. Fear conditioning and stimulus generalization in patients with social anxiety disorder. Modulation of fear extinction processes using transcranial electrical stimulation. Autonomic nervous system reactivity within the valence-arousal affective space: Modulation by sex and age. Emotion and decision-making under uncertainty: Physiological arousal predicts increased gambling during ambiguity but not risk. Probing the influence of unconscious fear-conditioned visual stimuli on eye movements. Seeing pain and pleasure on self and others: behavioral and psychophysiological reactivity in immersive virtual reality. Don't startle me-Interference of startle probe presentations and intermittent ratings with fear acquisition. The Role of the Subgenual Anterior Cingulate Cortex and Amygdala in Environmental Sensitivity to Infant Crying. Physiological markers of biased decision-making in problematic Internet users. Estradiol levels in women predict skin conductance response but not valence and expectancy ratings in conditioned fear extinction. Modification of Fear Memory by Pharmacological and Behavioural Interventions during Reconsolidation. Facial feedback and autonomic responsiveness reflect impaired emotional processing in Parkinson's Disease. [Decision Making and Electrodermal Activity]. State anxiety modulates the return of fear. Psychophysiological Investigation of Combat Veterans with Subthreshold Post-traumatic Stress Disorder Symptoms. Development of a Protocol for Simultaneous Assessment of Cognitive Functioning Under Psychosocial Stress. Uncomfortably numb: new evidence for suppressed emotional reactivity in response to body-threats in those predisposed to sub-clinical dissociative experiences. Pain rather than induced emotions and ICU sound increases skin conductance variability in healthy volunteers. Social stimuli increase physiological reactivity but not defensive responses. The Candy Crush Sweet Tooth: How 'Near-misses' in Candy Crush Increase Frustration, and the Urge to Continue Gameplay. Adversity-induced relapse of fear: neural mechanisms and implications for relapse prevention from a study on experimentally induced return-of-fear following fear conditioning and extinction. Eye movements are captured by a perceptually simple conditioned stimulus in the absence of explicit contingency knowledge. Implicit and Explicit Measurements of Affective Responses to Food Odors. Emotional Diathesis, Emotional Stress, and Childhood Stuttering. Delayed extinction fails to reduce skin conductance reactivity to fear-conditioned stimuli. Emotional Experience and Awareness of Self: Functional MRI Studies of Depersonalization Disorder. A pragmatic comparison of noise burst and electric shock unconditioned stimuli for fear conditioning research with many trials. Linking Social Anxiety with Social Competence in Early Adolescence: Physiological and Coping Moderators. Reduced anticipation of negative emotional events in alexithymia. Disentangling the roles of arousal and amygdala activation in emotional declarative memory. Fear generalization gradients in visuospatial attention. The impact of stimulus arousal level on emotion regulation effectiveness in borderline personality disorder. Explicit Facial Emotion Processing in Patients With Dissociative Seizures. Emotional suppression in chronic fatigue syndrome: Experimental study. Nothing is safe: Intolerance of uncertainty is associated with compromised fear extinction learning. What Is Going On Around Here? Intolerance of Uncertainty Predicts Threat Generalization. Behavioral and autonomic reactivity to moral dilemmas in frontotemporal dementia versus Alzheimer's disease. Disgusted but not afraid: Feelings toward same-sex kissing reveal subtle homonegativity. Cortisol effects on fear memory reconsolidation in women. Pupil Size Changes as an Active Information Channel for Biofeedback Applications. No evidence for blocking the return of fear by disrupting reconsolidation prior to extinction learning. Racial stereotypes impair flexibility of emotional learning. Hyperresponsiveness of the Neural Fear Network During Fear Conditioning and Extinction Learning in Male Cocaine Users. Facing the Problem: Impaired Emotion Recognition During Multimodal Social Information Processing in Borderline Personality Disorder. Renewal of conditioned fear in a novel context is associated with hippocampal activation and connectivity. Measuring Intuition: Nonconscious Emotional Information Boosts Decision Accuracy and Confidence. Can Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation Augment Extinction of Conditioned Fear? Lapses in skin conductance responding across anatomical sites: Comparison of fingers, feet, forehead, and wrist. Higher-order Multivariable Polynomial Regression to Estimate Human Affective States. Immediate extinction promotes the return of fear. Treatment effect on biases in size estimation in spider phobia. Regulating Emotions during Difficult Multiattribute Decision Making: The Role of Pre-Decisional Coherence Shifting. The Impact of Emotions and Empathy-Related Traits on Punishment Behavior: Introduction and Validation of the Inequality Game. Modeling fear-conditioned bradycardia in humans. Affective Computing and the Impact of Gender and Age. Psychophysiological responses to auditory change. A developmental analysis of threat/safety learning and extinction recall during middle childhood. Positive affect predicts less reacquisition of fear: relevance for long-term outcomes of exposure therapy. The Clock'N Test as a Possible Measure of Emotions: Normative Data Collected on a Non-clinical Population. Cognitive flexibility, heart rate variability, and resilience predict fine-grained regulation of arousal during prolonged threat. Feasibility and Effects of a Brief Compassion-Focused Imagery Intervention in Psychotic Patients with Paranoid Ideation: A Randomized Experimental Pilot Study. Testing Augmented Reality for Cue Exposure in Obese Patients: An Exploratory Study. Evaluating differences in Pavlovian fear acquisition and extinction as predictors of outcome from cognitive behavioural therapy for anxious children. Extinction retention and the menstrual cycle: Different associations for women with posttraumatic stress disorder. The arousing power of everyday materials: an analysis of the physiological and behavioral responses to visually and tactually presented textures. Emotional and physiological reactivity in Complicated Grief. FEAR CONDITIONING AND EXTINCTION IN YOUTH WITH OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER. Developmental aspects of fear: Comparing the acquisition and generalization of conditioned fear in children and adults. Physiological evidence of interpersonal dynamics in a cooperative production task. Facets of clinicians' anxiety and the delivery of cognitive behavioral therapy. Covert digital manipulation of vocal emotion alter speakers' emotional states in a congruent direction. Comparison of physiological responses to affect eliciting pictures and music. IMPAIRED FEAR EXTINCTION ASSOCIATED WITH PTSD INCREASES WITH HOURS-SINCE-WAKING. Differences in autonomic functions as related to induced stress between children with and without cerebral palsy while performing a virtual meal-making task. Visuospatial Working Memory Capacity Predicts Physiological Arousal in a Narrative Task. Dissociable Learning Processes Underlie Human Pain Conditioning. Effect of continuous and partial reinforcement on the acquisition and extinction of human conditioned fear. Convergence in feeling, divergence in physiology: How culture influences the consequences of disgust suppression and amplification among European Americans and Asian Americans. Neurological damage disrupts normal sex differences in psychophysiological responsiveness to music. Maltreatment Exposure, Brain Structure, and Fear Conditioning in Children and Adolescents. Vasomotor symptoms in prostate cancer survivors undergoing androgen deprivation therapy. Uncontrollable and unpredictable stress interacts with subclinical depression and anxiety scores in determining anxiety response. Effects of prefrontal rTMS on autonomic reactions to affective pictures. Potentiation of the startle reflex is in line with contingency reversal instructions rather than the conditioning history. Sensitivity of Physiological Emotional Measures to Odors Depends on the Product and the Pleasantness Ranges Used. Self-distancing from trauma memories reduces physiological but not subjective emotional reactivity among Veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Vicarious Fear Learning Depends on Empathic Appraisals and Trait Empathy. Cognitive Workload and Psychophysiological Parameters During Multitask Activity in Helicopter Pilots. Acute personalized habitual caffeine doses improve attention and have selective effects when considering the fractionation of executive functions. Body visual discontinuity affects feeling of ownership and skin conductance responses. Fear and physiological arousal during a virtual height challenge--effects in patients with acrophobia and healthy controls. Not seeing or feeling is still believing: conscious and non-conscious pain modulation after direct and observational learning. Compound stimulus extinction reduces spontaneous recovery in humans. Eye Movements Index Implicit Memory Expression in Fear Conditioning. A Scent of Anxiety: Olfactory Context Conditioning and its Influence on Social Cues. Are anxiety and fear separable emotions in driving? A laboratory study of behavioural and physiological responses to different driving environments. Bridging psychophysiological and phenomenological characteristics of psychosis--Preliminary evidence for the relevance of emotion regulation. Physiophenomenology in retrospect: Memory reliably reflects physiological arousal during a prior threatening experience. Age-Related Differences in Response to Music-Evoked Emotion Among Children and Adolescents with Autism Spectrum Disorders. Alexithymia predicts arousal-based processing deficits and discordance between emotion response systems during emotional imagery. The Impact of Instructions on Generalization of Conditioned Fear in Humans. Improving Managers' Psychophysical Well-Being: Effectiveness of Respiratory Sinus Arrhythmia Biofeedback. Increased affective reactivity to neutral stimuli and decreased maintenance of affective responses in bipolar disorder. From Sound to Significance: Exploring the Mechanisms Underlying Emotional Reactions to Music. Fear and time: Fear speeds up the internal clock. Attribution-Based Nocebo Effects. Perceived Effects of a Placebo Pill and a Sham Magnetic Field on Cognitive Performance and Somatic Symptoms. When Threat Is Near, Get Out of Here: Dynamics of Defensive Behavior During Freezing and Active Avoidance. Embodied emotion: the influence of manipulated facial and bodily states on emotive responses. Identifying mechanisms that underlie links between COMT genotype and aggression in male adolescents with ADHD. Emotion Regulation After Traumatic Brain Injury: Distinct Patterns of Sympathetic Activity During Anger Expression and Recognition. Heart rate pattern and resting heart rate variability mediate individual differences in contextual anxiety and conditioned responses. Transdermal neuromodulation of noradrenergic activity suppresses psychophysiological and biochemical stress responses in humans. Self-Regulation of Anterior Insula with Real-Time fMRI and Its Behavioral Effects in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: A Feasibility Study. Sympathetic arousal of young children who stutter during a stressful picture naming task. Optimising a model-based approach to inferring fear learning from skin conductance responses. Oxytocin Facilitates Pavlovian Fear Learning in Males. Reading under the skin: physiological activation during reading in children with dyslexia and typical readers. Emotional trait and memory associates of sleep timing and quality. Reliable emotion recognition system based on dynamic adaptive fusion of forehead biopotentials and physiological signals. Effects of post-extinction l-DOPA administration on the spontaneous recovery and reinstatement of fear in a human fMRI study. Extinction learning is slower, weaker and less context specific after alcohol. Pain Sensitivity in Adolescent Males with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: Testing for Associations with Conduct Disorder and Callous and Unemotional Traits. Medial prefrontal pathways for the contextual regulation of extinguished fear in humans. Probing the Interoceptive Network by Listening to Heartbeats: An fMRI Study. Can biofeedback training of psychophysiological responses enhance athletes' sport performance? A practitioner's perspective. Affective state and locus of control modulate the neural response to threat. Lighting to Make You Feel Better: Improving the Mood of Elderly People with Affective Ambiences. Aggression in borderline personality disorder: A multidimensional model. Panic and comorbid depression and their associations with stress reactivity, interoceptive awareness and interoceptive accuracy of various bioparameters. Effects of anxiety sensitivity and expectations on the modulation of the startle eyeblink response during a caffeine challenge. Impaired decision making under ambiguity but not under risk in individuals with pathological buying-behavioral and psychophysiological evidence. Demographic factors predict magnitude of conditioned fear. Psychophsyiological reactivity during uncertainty and ambiguity processing in high and low worriers. Enhancement of Odor Sensitivity Following Repeated Odor and Visual Fear Conditioning. Increased anterior insula activity in anxious individuals is linked to diminished perceived control. A time estimation task as a possible measure of emotions: difference depending on the nature of the stimulus used. Bi-Directional Tuning of Amygdala Sensitivity in Combat Veterans Investigated with fMRI. Learning to fear depends on emotion and gaze interaction: The role of self-relevance in fear learning. Sex differences in conditioned stimulus discrimination during context-dependent fear learning and its retrieval in humans: the role of biological sex, contraceptives and menstrual cycle phases. Resting heart rate variability is associated with inhibition of conditioned fear. Analysis of physiological signals for recognition of boredom, pain, and surprise emotions. Exposure to extinction-associated contextual tone during slow-wave sleep and wakefulness differentially modulates fear expression. Neural circuitry underlying effects of context on human pain-related fear extinction in a renewal paradigm. Effects of Cortisol on Reconsolidation of Reactivated Fear Memories. Emotional reactivity during anticipation and perception of affective pictures. Retrospective reversal of extinction of conditioned fear by instruction. Psychophysiological responses to eye contact in adolescents with social anxiety disorder. Positive and negative emotional contexts unevenly predict episodic memory. Dealing with feeling: Specific emotion regulation skills predict responses to stress in psychosis. A mechanism-oriented approach to psychopathology: The role of Pavlovian conditioning. Fear conditioning induced by interpersonal conflicts in healthy individuals. Neural mechanisms of placebo anxiolysis. Neuropeptide S receptor gene variation and neural correlates of cognitive emotion regulation. Fear expression and return of fear following threat instruction with or without direct contingency experience. Defensive activation during the rubber hand illusion: Ownership versus proprioceptive drift. Night or darkness, which intensifies the feeling of fear? How does reactivity to frustrative non-reward increase risk for externalizing symptoms? Dissociation between the cognitive and interoceptive components of mindfulness in the treatment of chronic worry. Anxiety-provoked gait changes are selectively dopa-responsive in Parkinson's disease. Stress matters! Psychophysiological and emotional loadings of pregnant women undergoing fetal magnetic resonance imaging. Spontaneous eye movements and trait empathy predict vicarious learning of fear. Autonomic arousal and attentional orienting to visual threat are predicted by awareness. "I was that close": Investigating Players' Reactions to Losses, Wins, and Near-Misses on Scratch Cards. The down-regulation of disgust by implementation intentions: experiential and physiological concomitants. Body dissatisfaction and mirror exposure: evidence for a dissociation between self-report and physiological responses in highly body-dissatisfied women. A Stress-Induced Shift From Trace to Delay Conditioning Depends on the Mineralocorticoid Receptor. Neural correlates of individual differences in fear learning. Sensitivity towards fear of electric shock in passive threat situations. Biomarkers of "Linguistic Anxiety" in aphasia: a proof-of-concept case study. Indirect acquisition of pain-related fear: an experimental study of observational learning using coloured cold metal bars. EEVEE: the Empathy-Enhancing Virtual Evolving Environment. Understanding Emotions in Frontotemporal Dementia: The Explicit and Implicit Emotional Cue Mismatch. Self-reported trait mindfulness and affective reactivity: a motivational approach using multiple psychophysiological measures. The effects of sighing on the cardiovascular system. Brain morphology correlates of interindividual differences in conditioned fear acquisition and extinction learning. Assessing embodied interpersonal emotion regulation in somatic symptom disorders: a case study. Unpleasant odors increase aversion to monetary losses. 'Do Well B.': Design Of WELL Being monitoring systems. A study protocol for the application in autism. Acoustic Emotional Processing in Patients With Borderline Personality Disorder: Hyper- or Hyporeactivity? Cold pressor test improves fear extinction in healthy men. Neural Mechanism of a Sex-Specific Risk Variant for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in the Type I Receptor of the Pituitary Adenylate Cyclase Activating Polypeptide. Repressors benefit from reappraising a threatening emotional event. Investigation of dose-related effects of carnosine on anxiety with sympathetic skin response and T-maze. Generalisation of fear and avoidance along a semantic continuum. Novelty-facilitated extinction: providing a novel outcome in place of an expected threat diminishes recovery of defensive responses. Retention of perceptual generalization of fear extinction. Affective and physiological responses to the suffering of others: compassion and vagal activity. Is anxiety associated with hot flashes in women with breast cancer? Psychophysiological responses to unpredictable threat: effects of cue and temporal unpredictability. Do patients with chronic pain show autonomic arousal when confronted with feared movements? An experimental investigation of the fear-avoidance model. Attentional focus during exposure in spider phobia: the role of schematic versus non-schematic imagery. Symbolic online exposure for spider fear: habituation of fear, disgust and physiological arousal and predictors of symptom improvement. Electrodermal activity processing: a convex optimization approach. Physiological and behavioral patterns of corruption. Neural circuitry of abdominal pain-related fear learning and reinstatement in irritable bowel syndrome. Effects of perceived efficacy and prospect of success on detection in the Guilty Actions Test. Oxytocin facilitates the extinction of conditioned fear in humans. Spatial proximity amplifies valence in emotional memory and defensive approach-avoidance. Direction of attention bias to threat relates to differences in fear acquisition and extinction in anxious children. Ethnic differences in physiological responses to fear conditioned stimuli. A comprehensive examination of delayed emotional recovery in borderline personality disorder. Fear conditioning with film clips: a complex associative learning paradigm. Beyond extinction: Habituation eliminates conditioned skin conductance across contexts. Anxiety sensitivity and expectation of arousal differentially affect the respiratory response to caffeine. Low levels of estradiol are associated with elevated conditioned responding during fear extinction and with intrusive memories in daily life. Emotional non-acceptance links early life stress and blunted cortisol reactivity to social threat. Extinction retention and fear renewal in a lifetime obsessive-compulsive disorder sample. Dorsomedial Prefrontal Cortex Mediates the Impact of Serotonin Transporter Linked Polymorphic Region Genotype on Anticipatory Threat Reactions. Pharmacological blockade of memory reconsolidation in posttraumatic stress disorder: three negative psychophysiological studies. Fear conditioning and extinction in anxious and nonanxious youth and adults: examining a novel developmentally appropriate fear-conditioning task. Single dose propranolol does not affect physiologic or emotional reactivity to smoking cues. Stress following extinction learning leads to a context-dependent return of fear. Sex differences in cognitive regulation of psychosocial achievement stress: brain and behavior. Impaired contextual modulation of memories in PTSD: an fMRI and psychophysiological study of extinction retention and fear renewal. Emotion processing deficits in alexithymia and response to a depth of processing intervention. Multilevel analysis of facial expressions of emotion and script: self-report (arousal and valence) and psychophysiological correlates. Tracking explicit and implicit long-lasting traces of fearful memories in humans. [Study of emotion recognition under anxiety based on physiological signals by relief method]. The impact of previously learned feature-relevance on generalisation of conditioned fear in humans. Prereactivation propranolol fails to reduce skin conductance reactivity to prepared fear-conditioned stimuli. Resting heart rate variability predicts safety learning and fear extinction in an interoceptive fear conditioning paradigm. Skin conductance fear conditioning impairments and aggression: a longitudinal study. Revisiting the association between hypnotisability and blink rate. Expertise in video game playing is associated with reduced valence-concordant emotional expressivity. BDNFval66met affects neural activation pattern during fear conditioning and 24 h delayed fear recall. Autonomic nervous system activity of preschool-age children who stutter. Stress exposure prior to fear acquisition interacts with estradiol status to alter recall of fear extinction in humans. Borderline personality features as a predictor of forms and functions of aggression during middle childhood: examining the roles of gender and physiological reactivity. The trauma of peer victimization: psychophysiological and emotional characteristics of memory imagery in subjects with social anxiety disorder. Mindful attention regulation and non-judgmental orientation in depression: a multi-method approach. The emotional and attentional impact of exposure to one's own body in bulimia nervosa: a physiological view. Unconditioned stimulus revaluation to promote conditioned fear extinction in the memory reconsolidation window. De novo fear conditioning across diagnostic groups in the affective disorders: evidence for learning impairments. Neurophysiological correlates of dysregulated emotional arousal in severe traumatic brain injury. Stimulus typicality determines how broadly fear is generalized. Heart rate variability and the anxious client: cardiac autonomic and behavioral associations with therapeutic alliance. Gender differences in emotional responses to cooperative and competitive game play. Threatening shapes: the impact of simple geometric configurations on peripheral physiological markers. Relations between trait impulsivity, behavioral impulsivity, physiological arousal, and risky sexual behavior among young men. Maternal dispositional empathy and electrodermal reactivity: Interactive contributions to maternal sensitivity with toddler-aged children. Psychophysiological arousal at encoding leads to reduced reactivity but enhanced emotional memory following sleep. The persistence of socially instructed threat: two threat-of-shock studies. Affective empathy differs in male violent offenders with high- and low-trait psychopathy. The conditioning and extinction of fear in youths: what's sex got to do with it? One night of partial sleep deprivation affects habituation of hypothalamus and skin conductance responses. Cognitive and psychophysiological correlates of disgust in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Dissociable roles for hippocampal and amygdalar volume in human fear conditioning. Defensive eye-blink startle responses in a human experimental model of anxiety. Amygdala-prefrontal cortex functional connectivity during threat-induced anxiety and goal distraction. Different levels of implicit emotional recognition in posterior cortical atrophy (PCA). Worry as an adaptive avoidance strategy in healthy controls but not in pathological worriers. Integration of negative emotional experience versus suppression: addressing the question of adaptive functioning. The amygdala mediates the emotional modulation of threat-elicited skin conductance response. Do ambient urban odors evoke basic emotions? Prefrontal oscillations during recall of conditioned and extinguished fear in humans. Effects of postretrieval-extinction learning on return of contextually controlled cued fear. The regulation of induced depression during a frustrating situation: benefits of expressive suppression in Chinese individuals. Resting physiological arousal is associated with the experience of music-induced chills. Laboratory-induced cue reactivity among individuals with prescription opioid dependence. Generalization of human fear acquisition and extinction within a novel arbitrary stimulus category. Where is the rhythm generator for emotional breathing? Moderating Effects of Coping on Associations between Autonomic Arousal and Adolescent Internalizing and Externalizing Problems. Emotion regulation, physiological arousal and PTSD symptoms in trauma-exposed individuals. The impact of cardiac perception on emotion experience and cognitive performance under mental stress. ANS responses and facial expressions differentiate between the taste of commercial breakfast drinks. Enhancing the benefits of written emotional disclosure through response training. Rethinking the role of worry in generalized anxiety disorder: evidence supporting a model of emotional contrast avoidance. Testing the temporal stability of individual differences in the acquisition and generalization of fear. Physiological and behavioral signatures of reflective exploratory choice. Electrodermal responses and memory recall in migraineurs and headache-free controls. Autonomic emotional responses to the induction of the rubber-hand illusion in those that report anomalous bodily experiences: evidence for specific psychophysiological components associated with illusory body representations. Fear conditioning and extinction in anxiety- and depression-prone persons. Dynamics of autonomic nervous system responses and facial expressions to odors. Health anxiety--an indicator of higher interoceptive sensitivity? Thermal signature of fear conditioning in mild post traumatic stress disorder. Extinction resistant changes in the human auditory association cortex following threat learning. Acute stress impairs the retrieval of extinction memory in humans. Exposure to stress attenuates fear retrieval in healthy men. The power of clinicians' affective communication: how reassurance about non-abandonment can reduce patients' physiological arousal and increase information recall in bad news consultations. An experimental study using analogue patients. Delayed effects of cortisol enhance fear memory of trace conditioning. Interactions of time of day and sleep with between-session habituation and extinction memory in young adult males. The biphasic effects of moderate alcohol consumption with a meal on ambiance-induced mood and autonomic nervous system balance: a randomized crossover trial. Do CS-US pairings actually matter? A within-subject comparison of instructed fear conditioning with and without actual CS-US pairings. Ventromedial prefrontal cortex activity and rapid eye movement sleep are associated with subsequent fear expression in human subjects. Effects of virtual environment platforms on emotional responses. Testing a neurobiological model of depersonalization disorder using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation. Social attention, affective arousal and empathy in men with Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY): evidence from eyetracking and skin conductance. Autonomic hypoactivity in boys with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and the influence of methylphenidate. Transcranial direct current stimulation of the prefrontal cortex: a means to modulate fear memories. Rethinking emotion: cognitive reappraisal is an effective positive and negative emotion regulation strategy in bipolar disorder. Triggers of fear: perceptual cues versus conceptual information in spider phobia. Nonconscious emotional activation colors first impressions: a regulatory role for conscious awareness. Physiological reactivity in a community sample of sexually aggressive young men: a test of competing hypotheses. Left prefrontal activity reflects the ability of vicarious fear learning: a functional near-infrared spectroscopy study. Does emotion help or hinder reasoning? The moderating role of relevance. Fear acquisition and extinction in offspring of mothers with anxiety and depressive disorders. Relationship between fear conditionability and aversive memories: evidence from a novel conditioned-intrusion paradigm. Hemodynamic and affective correlates assessed during performance on the Columbia card task (CCT). Self-regulation of the anterior insula: Reinforcement learning using real-time fMRI neurofeedback. Effects of empathy and conflict resolution strategies on psychophysiological arousal and satisfaction in romantic relationships. Age differences in managing response to sadness elicitors using attentional deployment, positive reappraisal and suppression. Characterizing the psychophysiological signature of boredom. No evidence for enhanced extinction memory consolidation through noradrenergic reuptake inhibition-delayed memory test and reinstatement in human fMRI. Does fear expectancy prime fear? An autonomic study in spider phobics. Human fear extinction and return of fear using reconsolidation update mechanisms: the contribution of on-line expectancy ratings. Development of fear acquisition and extinction in children: effects of age and anxiety. The insular cortex: relationship to skin conductance responses to facial expression of emotion in temporal lobe epilepsy. Psychophysiology of prospective memory. Physiological correlates of the big 5: autonomic responses to video presentations. Fear generalization in humans: impact of feature learning on conditioning and extinction. Multimodal assessment of long-term memory recall and reinstatement in a combined cue and context fear conditioning and extinction paradigm in humans. Psychological traits influence autonomic nervous system recovery following esophageal intubation in health and functional chest pain. Anxiolytic effects of vestipitant in a sub-group of healthy volunteers known to be sensitive to CO2 challenge. Talking about social conflict in the MRI scanner: neural correlates of being empathized with. Implicit emotion regulation in the presence of threat: neural and autonomic correlates. Transcranial direct current stimulation enhances cognitive control during emotion regulation. Effects of three levels of arousal on 3-back working memory task performance. The impact of modulated, colored light on the autonomic nervous system. An improved algorithm for model-based analysis of evoked skin conductance responses. Testing the effects of suppression and reappraisal on emotional concordance using a multivariate multilevel model. Moral decision-making and theory of mind in patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease. Are we afraid of different categories of stimuli in identical ways? Evidence from skin conductance responses. Empathic competencies in violent offenders. Autonomic responses to social and nonsocial pictures in adolescents with autism spectrum disorder. Differential impact of the first and second wave of a stress response on subsequent fear conditioning in healthy men. Automatic facial responses to briefly presented emotional stimuli in autism spectrum disorder. Using music to change mood while driving. Sympathetic nerve activity can be estimated from skin conductance responses - a comment on Henderson et al. (2012). Extinction of conditioned fear is better learned and recalled in the morning than in the evening. Comorbidity of schizotypy and psychopathy: skin conductance to affective pictures. Cognitive emotion regulation fails the stress test. Patterns of physiological and affective responses to vehicle pass-by noises. Emotional modulation of pain and spinal nociception in persons with major depressive disorder (MDD). Impaired emotional learning and involvement of the corticotropin-releasing factor signaling system in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Cortisol modifies extinction learning of recently acquired fear in men. Effects of unconditioned stimulus intensity and fear extinction on subsequent sleep architecture in an afternoon nap. Eye movements during recall of aversive memory decreases conditioned fear. The effect of partner-directed emotion in social exchange decision-making. An amplification of feedback from facial muscles strengthened sympathetic activations to emotional facial cues. Evidence for unintentional emotional contagion beyond dyads. Monetary effects on fear conditioning. Impaired emotional contagion following severe traumatic brain injury. Stress differentially affects fear conditioning in men and women. Two weeks of pretreatment with escitalopram facilitates extinction learning in healthy individuals. Self-report, personality and autonomic system modulation in response to empathic conflictual versus non conflictual situation. Deficits in conditioned fear extinction in obsessive-compulsive disorder and neurobiological changes in the fear circuit. Dissociation of neuronal, electrodermal, and evaluative responses in disgust extinction. Dissociation between implicit and explicit responses in postconditioning UCS revaluation after fear conditioning in humans. Neural and psychophysiological markers of delay aversion in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Autonomic and neural correlates of dysregulated arousal in severe traumatic brain injury. Psychophysiological response patterns to affective film stimuli. Fear of acupuncture enhances sympathetic activation to acupuncture stimulation. Worried sleep: 24-h monitoring in high and low worriers. Effects of exposure to food images on physiological reactivity and emotional responses in women with bulimia nervosa. Negative, but not positive emotional images modulate the startle response independent of conscious awareness. Emotional modulation of pain and spinal nociception in fibromyalgia. Low skin conductance activity in infancy predicts aggression in toddlers 2 years later. Pervasive competition between threat and reward in the brain. Altered cingulate and amygdala response towards threat and safe cues in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Preliminary physiological evidence for impaired emotion regulation in depersonalization disorder. Testing a cognitive model of menopausal hot flushes and night sweats. Effects of goal- and task-oriented motivation in the guilty action test. Inducing symptoms in high symptom reporters via emotional pictures: the interactive effects of valence and arousal. Parenting stress and externalizing behavior symptoms in children: the impact of emotional reactivity. Effects of discrimination training on fear generalization gradients and perceptual classification in humans. Acute anxiolytic effects of quetiapine during virtual reality exposure--a double-blind placebo-controlled trial in patients with specific phobia. The importance of context: when relative relief renders pain pleasant. Additive effects of threat-of-shock and picture valence on startle reflex modulation. Borderline personality features and emotional reactivity: the mediating role of interpersonal vulnerabilities. The 5-HT1D/1B receptor agonist sumatriptan enhances fear of simulated speaking and reduces plasma levels of prolactin. Cannabidiol enhances consolidation of explicit fear extinction in humans. Somatization severity associated with postero-medial complex structures. Hyper-reactivity in fragile X syndrome females: generalised or specific to socially-salient stimuli? A skin conductance study. Fearlessness in juvenile offenders is associated with offending rate. Effect of multiple context exposure on renewal in spider phobia. Multiple sclerosis decreases explicit counterfactual processing and risk taking in decision making. Preschool children with lower executive function may be more vulnerable to emotional-based eating in the absence of hunger. Internal and external attention in speech anxiety. Deficient safety learning characterizes high trait anxious individuals. Effects of empathic paraphrasing - extrinsic emotion regulation in social conflict. Aversive priming: cognitive processing of threatening stimuli is facilitated by aversive primes. Automatic facial responses to affective stimuli in high-functioning adults with autism spectrum disorder. No effect of trait anxiety on differential fear conditioning or fear generalization. Emotional congruence within couple interaction: the role of attachment avoidance. Sex differences in fear conditioning in posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychophysiological assessment of emotional processing in patients with borderline personality disorder with and without comorbid substance use. Salivary alpha-amylase changes promoted by sustained exposure to affective pictures. The frustrating effects of just missing the jackpot: slot machine near-misses trigger large skin conductance responses, but no post-reinforcement pauses. The effect of counterconditioning on evaluative responses and harm expectancy in a fear conditioning paradigm. Does disgust increase parasympathetic activation in individuals with a history of fainting? A psychophysiological analysis of disgust stimuli with and without blood-injection-injury association. Stress, emotion regulation and cognitive performance: the predictive contributions of trait and state relative frontal EEG alpha asymmetry. Distinguishing youths at risk for anxiety disorders from self-reported BIS sensitivity and its psychophysiological concomitants. Correlations between psychological tests and physiological responses during fear conditioning and renewal. Self-relevance appraisal of gaze direction and dynamic facial expressions: effects on facial electromyographic and autonomic reactions. Understanding how drivers learn to anticipate risk on the road: A laboratory experiment of affective anticipation of road hazards. Alexithymia is associated with an augmenter profile, but not only: evidence for anticipation to arousing music. Instructed extinction differentially affects the emotional and cognitive expression of associative fear memory. Functional gene polymorphisms in the serotonin system and traumatic life events modulate the neural basis of fear acquisition and extinction. Changing heartbeat perception to induce anxiety in virtual environments. Goal relevance and goal conduciveness appraisals lead to differential autonomic reactivity in emotional responding to performance feedback. Failure of neural responses to safety cues in schizophrenia. Autonomic and emotional responses of graduate student clinicians in speech-language pathology to stuttered speech. The role of menstrual cycle phase and anxiety sensitivity in catastrophic misinterpretation of physical symptoms during a CO(2) challenge. Partner influence and in-phase versus anti-phase physiological linkage in romantic couples. Viewing loved faces inhibits defense reactions: a health-promotion mechanism? Acute stress disorder versus chronic posttraumatic stress disorder: inhibition of fear as a function of time since trauma. Is emotional Stroop interference linked to affective responses? Evidence from skin conductance and facial electromyography. Feelings into words: contributions of language to exposure therapy. Physiological and self-assessed emotional responses to emotion-eliciting films in borderline personality disorder. Human fear reconsolidation and allelic differences in serotonergic and dopaminergic genes. Covert recognition relies on affective valence in developmental prosopagnosia: evidence from the skin conductance response. The interaction between expected values and risk levels in a modified Iowa gambling task. Cannabinoid facilitation of fear extinction memory recall in humans. Aggression as an equifinal outcome of distinct neurocognitive and neuroaffective processes. Development of fear and guilt in young children: stability over time and relations with psychopathology. Updating fearful memories with extinction training during reconsolidation: a human study using auditory aversive stimuli. The Emotional Movie Database (EMDB): a self-report and psychophysiological study. Oxytocin interference in the effects induced by inhalation of 7.5% CO(2) in healthy volunteers. The impact of anxiety on social decision-making: behavioral and electrodermal findings. Affective engagement for facial expressions and emotional scenes: the influence of social anxiety. Dynamics of defensive reactivity in patients with panic disorder and agoraphobia: implications for the etiology of panic disorder. Functional MRI of the amygdala and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis during conditions of uncertainty in generalized anxiety disorder. Expressive talking among caregivers of hematopoietic stem cell transplant survivors: acceptability and concurrent subjective, objective, and physiologic indicators of emotion. Intervention to lower anxiety of 18F-FDG PET/CT patients by use of audiovisual imagery during the uptake phase before imaging. Activation of the ventral striatum during aversive contextual conditioning in humans. Empathic behavioral and physiological responses to dynamic stimuli in depression. Medial prefrontal cortex activity during the extinction of conditioned fear: an investigation using functional near-infrared spectroscopy. Real time emotion aware applications: a case study employing emotion evocative pictures and neuro-physiological sensing enhanced by Graphic Processor Units. [The measurement of electrodermal activity]. Psychophysiological responses to cooperation: the role of outcome and gender. Worrying affects associative fear learning: a startle fear conditioning study. Socially anxious and confident men interact with a forward virtual woman: an experimental study. Age, gender, and arousal in recognition of negative and neutral pictures 1 year later. Erasing fear for an imagined threat event. The tell-tale: what do heart rate; skin temperature and skin conductance reveal about emotions of people with severe and profound intellectual disabilities? Executive functioning performance predicts subjective and physiological acute stress reactivity: preliminary results. Gender differences in craving and cue reactivity to smoking and negative affect/stress cues. Somatic aphasia: mismatch of body sensations with autonomic stress reactivity in psychopathy. Neuroticism modifies psychophysiological responses to fearful films. Mind-body relationships in elite apnea divers during breath holding: a study of autonomic responses to acute hypoxemia. Cross-US reinstatement of human conditioned fear: return of old fears or emergence of new ones? Apology isn't good enough: an apology suppresses an approach motivation but not the physiological and psychological anger. Neural substrates of individual differences in human fear learning: evidence from concurrent fMRI, fear-potentiated startle, and US-expectancy data. Marital conflict and growth in children's internalizing symptoms: the role of autonomic nervous system activity. Reinstatement of fear in humans: autonomic and experiential responses in a differential conditioning paradigm. Changes in emotional empathy, affective responsivity, and behavior following severe traumatic brain injury. Empathy in cooperative versus non-cooperative situations: the contribution of self-report measures and autonomic responses. Sensory and sympathetic correlates of heat pain sensitization and habituation in men and women. Bilateral skin conductance responses to emotional faces. Retrieval per se is not sufficient to trigger reconsolidation of human fear memory. Medial prefrontal dysfunction and prolonged amygdala response during instructed fear processing in borderline personality disorder. Acquisition and generalization of fear conditioning are not modulated by the BDNF-val66met polymorphism in humans. Does good+good=better? A pilot study on the effect of combining hedonically valenced smells and images. Fear conditioning in psychopaths: event-related potentials and peripheral measures. Brain activity associated with omission of an aversive event reveals the effects of fear learning and generalization. Defensive mobilization in specific phobia: fear specificity, negative affectivity, and diagnostic prominence. Testing the effects of Δ9-THC and D-cycloserine on extinction of conditioned fear in humans. Spinal modulation of nociception by music. Emotional sweating across the body: comparing 16 different skin conductance measurement locations. The effects of noradrenergic blockade on extinction in humans. Resting amygdala and medial prefrontal metabolism predicts functional activation of the fear extinction circuit. Physiological responses induced by emotion-eliciting films. Preattentive processing of feared stimuli in blood-injection-injury fearful subjects. Empathy manipulation impacts music-induced emotions: a psychophysiological study on opera. Psychological and physiological responses to odor-evoked autobiographic memory. Watching neutral and threatening movies: subjective experience and autonomic responses in subjects with different hypnotizability levels. Affective-motivational brain responses to direct gaze in children with autism spectrum disorder. Decision-making capacities and affective reward anticipation in DWI recidivists compared to non-offenders: a preliminary study. Psychophysiological responses to CO₂inhalation. The time course of autonomic parameters and muscle tension during recovery following a moderate cognitive stressor: dependency on trait anxiety level. Physiological reactivity to faces via live and video-mediated communication in typical and atypical development. Individual differences in neural correlates of fear conditioning as a function of 5-HTTLPR and stressful life events. Psychopathic traits and physiological responses to aversive stimuli in children aged 9-11 years. The effects of an unexpected spider stimulus on skin conductance responses and eye movements: an inattentional blindness study. Does pre-exposure inhibit fear context conditioning? A Virtual Reality Study. Neural mechanisms underlying the conditioned diminution of the unconditioned fear response. Autonomic arousal to direct gaze correlates with social impairments among children with ASD. The differential contribution of facial expressions, prosody, and speech content to empathy. Resting cerebral metabolism correlates with skin conductance and functional brain activation during fear conditioning. Neural reactivity tracks fear generalization gradients. Cognitive and physiological dissociations in response to emotional pictures in patients with anorexia. Social anxiety modulates amygdala activation during social conditioning. The effect of cognitive reappraisal on physiological reactivity and emotional memory. Expectancy bias in a selective conditioning procedure: trait anxiety increases the threat value of a blocked stimulus. Behaviour, physiology and experience of pathological laughing and crying in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Unpacking cognitive reappraisal: goals, tactics, and outcomes. Socially anxious and peer-victimized preadolescents: "doubly primed" for distress? All alone with sweaty palms--physiological arousal and ostracism. Role of conceptual knowledge in learning and retention of conditioned fear. Sex differences in panic-relevant responding to a 10% carbon dioxide-enriched air biological challenge. Physiological reactivity and facial expression to emotion-inducing films in patients with schizophrenia. Are both the sensory and the affective dimensions of pain encoded in the face? Gender differences in emotional responses: a psychophysiological study. Objective measures of emotion related to brand attitude: a new way to quantify emotion-related aspects relevant to marketing. Individual differences in the effects of music engagement on responses to painful stimulation. Dissociation and emotion regulation in borderline personality disorder. [Assessment of emotional reactivity to food images in bulimia nervosa]. Autonomic arousal in adults who stutter prior to various reading tasks intended to elicit changes in stuttering frequency. Effects of outcomes and random arbitration on emotions in a competitive gambling task. Investigating the neural mechanisms of aware and unaware fear memory with FMRI. Neuronal correlates of extinction learning are modulated by sex hormones. Reconsolidation in a human fear conditioning study: a test of extinction as updating mechanism. Competition between an avoidance response and a safety signal: evidence for a single learning system. The effect of deep and slow breathing on pain perception, autonomic activity, and mood processing--an experimental study. Emotion recognition from physiological signals. Autonomic imbalance is associated with reduced facial recognition in somatoform disorders. Better fear conditioning is associated with reduced symptom severity in autism spectrum disorders. Tools for translational neuroscience: PTSD is associated with heightened fear responses using acoustic startle but not skin conductance measures. CD 38 expression, attachment style and habituation of arousal in relation to trust-related oxytocin release. Why is Facebook so successful? Psychophysiological measures describe a core flow state while using Facebook. Negative reinforcement smoking outcome expectancies are associated with affective response to acute nicotine administration and abstinence. Musical emotions: predicting second-by-second subjective feelings of emotion from low-level psychoacoustic features and physiological measurements. Resonance mechanism in empathic behavior BEES, BIS/BAS and psychophysiological contribution. Emotion and ocular responses in Parkinson's disease. Effects of rapid eye movement sleep deprivation on fear extinction recall and prediction error signaling. Impact of anticipatory processing versus distraction on multiple indices of anxiety in socially anxious individuals. The role of context in the processing of alcohol-relevant cues. Eye contact and arousal: the effects of stimulus duration. Estradiol modulates medial prefrontal cortex and amygdala activity during fear extinction in women and female rats. Expressiveness in musical emotions. Written emotional disclosure of trauma and trauma history alter pain sensitivity. Responding empathically: a question of heart, not a question of skin. When family looks strange and strangers look normal: a case of impaired face perception and recognition after stroke. Neuroticism influences brain activity during the experience of visceral pain. Is there a mutual relationship between opposite attentional biases underlying anxiety? An exploratory study on facial emotion recognition capacity in beginning Alzheimer's disease. Differential effects of alexithymia subscales on autonomic reactivity and anxiety during social stress. Noradrenergic enhancement of associative fear memory in humans. Surface facial electromyography, skin conductance, and self-reported emotional responses to light- and season-relevant stimuli in seasonal affective disorder. Test-retest reliability during fear acquisition and fear extinction in humans. Neuronal correlates of altered empathy and social cognition in borderline personality disorder. Anxiolytic-like effect of oxytocin in the simulated public speaking test. Aversive imagery in panic disorder: agoraphobia severity, comorbidity, and defensive physiology. Preoperative anxiety in adolescents undergoing surgery: a pilot study. Uncertainty is associated with biased expectancies and heightened responses to aversion. Modulation of nociceptive and acoustic startle responses to an unpredictable threat in men and women. Emotions induced by operatic music: psychophysiological effects of music, plot, and acting: a scientist's tribute to Maria Callas. Interlinked positive and negative feedback loops design emotional sweating. Hippocampal but not amygdalar volume affects contextual fear conditioning in humans. Are we more moral than we think? Exploring the role of affect in moral behavior and moral forecasting. Profiles of anger control in second-grade children: examination of self-report, observational, and physiological components. Psychophysiological responses to inspiratory resistive loads. The effects of sedative music, arousal music, and silence on electrocardiography signals. Conceptual similarity promotes generalization of higher order fear learning. How specific is specific phobia? Different neural response patterns in two subtypes of specific phobia. The influence of attention and arousal on emotion perception in adults with severe traumatic brain injury. Return of fear after retrospective inferences about the absence of an unconditioned stimulus during extinction. Body signals, cardiac awareness, and the perception of time. Neurobehavioral mechanisms of human fear generalization. Using startle to objectively measure anger and other emotional responses after traumatic brain injury: a pilot study. Symptom provocation in dental anxiety using cross-phobic video stimulation. Repression versus sensitization in response to media violence as predictors of cognitive avoidance and vigilance. Desensitization to media violence: links with habitual media violence exposure, aggressive cognitions, and aggressive behavior. Dual temperamental risk factors for psychopathic personality: evidence from self-report and skin conductance. The role of physiological arousal in time perception: psychophysiological evidence from an emotion regulation paradigm. The use of nasal skin temperature measurements in studying emotion in macaque monkeys. Phasic and sustained fear in humans elicits distinct patterns of brain activity. The effect of negative emotion on deductive reasoning: examining the contribution of physiological arousal. The influence of state anxiety on the acquisition and extinction of fear. Effects of picture size reduction and blurring on emotional engagement. Classical conditioning of autonomic fear responses is independent of contingency awareness. Napping promotes inter-session habituation to emotional stimuli. Emotional responses during social information seeking on Facebook. Bradygastric activity of the stomach predicts disgust sensitivity and perceived disgust intensity. The neural correlates of negative prediction error signaling in human fear conditioning. Implicit memory for emotional words is modulated by cardiac perception. Emotions in cognitive conflicts are not aversive but are task specific. Human fear conditioning conducted in full immersion 3-dimensional virtual reality. Why don't you feel how I feel? Insight into the absence of empathy after severe traumatic brain injury. Emotional response patterns during social threat in individuals with generalized social anxiety disorder and non-anxious controls. Chemosensory signals of competition increase the skin conductance response in humans. The effect of musical experience on emotional self-reports and psychophysiological responses to dissonance. Conditioning with masked stimuli affects the timecourse of skin conductance responses. Affective processing of loved faces: contributions from peripheral and central electrophysiology. Threat of suffocation and defensive reflex activation. Cognitive control associated with irritability induction: an autobiographical recall fMRI study. Learning as a model for neural plasticity in major depression. Temporal stability and coherence of anxiety, dyspnea, and physiological variables in panic disorder. Peripheral responses to attended and unattended angry prosody: a dichotic listening paradigm. A neuropeptide S receptor variant associated with overinterpretation of fear reactions: a potential neurogenetic basis for catastrophizing. Frontal EEG activation asymmetry reflects cognitive biases in anxiety: evidence from an emotional face Stroop task. An observational study of skin conductance monitoring as a means of predicting hypotension from spinal anaesthesia for caesarean delivery. Better than the real thing: eliciting fear with moving and static computer-generated stimuli. Dynamic causal modelling of anticipatory skin conductance responses. Autonomic cardiac control in depressed adolescents. Airway response to emotion- and disease-specific films in asthma, blood phobia, and health. Twenty-four hour skin conductance in panic disorder. Fear conditioning following a unilateral anterior temporal lobectomy: reduced autonomic responding and stimulus contingency knowledge. Human bed nucleus of the stria terminalis indexes hypervigilant threat monitoring. Attenuated subjective ratings and skin conductance responses to neutral and negative pictures in non-psychopathic mentally disordered offenders with various diagnoses. The neural correlates and temporal sequence of the relationship between shock exposure, disturbed sleep and impaired consolidation of fear extinction. Genes, suicide and decisions. Modeling hot flushes and quality of life in breast cancer survivors. Facial expression recognition, fear conditioning, and startle modulation in female subjects with conduct disorder. An investigation of discordance between subjective and physiological measures of vasomotor symptoms. Early brain-body impact of emotional arousal. The influence of gonadal hormones on conditioned fear extinction in healthy humans. Altered processing of contextual information during fear extinction in PTSD: an fMRI study. Dissociating response systems: erasing fear from memory. Skin conductance and memory fragmentation after exposure to an emotional film clip in depersonalization disorder. Emotional electrodermal response in coma and other low-responsive patients. Neural correlates of aversive conditioning: development of a functional imaging paradigm for the investigation of anxiety disorders. A preliminary investigation of the effects of experimentally induced mindfulness on emotional responding to film clips. Amygdala-dependent fear conditioning in humans is modulated by the BDNFval66met polymorphism. Cognitive-behavioral treatment for chronic nightmares in trauma-exposed persons: assessing physiological reactions to nightmare-related fear. Early heart rate responses to standardized trauma-related pictures predict posttraumatic stress disorder: a prospective study. The development of skin conductance fear conditioning in children from ages 3 to 8 years. Transfer of aversive respondent elicitation in accordance with equivalence relations. Anxiogenic properties of a computer simulation for panic disorder with agoraphobia. Are females more responsive to emotional stimuli? A neurophysiological study across arousal and valence dimensions. Habituation, sensitization, and emotional valence modulation of pain responses. Stuttered and fluent speakers' heart rate and skin conductance in response to fluent and stuttered speech. Developmental trajectories of skin conductance level in middle childhood: sex, race, and externalizing behavior problems as predictors of growth. Being hot-tempered: autonomic, emotional, and behavioral distinctions between childhood reactive and proactive aggression. Psychophysiological effects of emotional responding to goal attainment. Drug effects: agonistic and antagonistic processes. The impact of cigarette deprivation and cigarette availability on cue-reactivity in smokers. The D2 dopamine receptor gene variant C957T affects human fear conditioning and aversive priming. Aversive imagery in posttraumatic stress disorder: trauma recurrence, comorbidity, and physiological reactivity. Autonomic aspect of emotional response in depressed patients: relationships with personality. Avoiding negative outcomes: tracking the mechanisms of avoidance learning in humans during fear conditioning. The effects of medial temporal lobe resections on verbal threat and fear conditioning. Psychophysiological correlates of chronic worry: cued versus non-cued fear reaction. Relationships between affective states and decision-making. Transient neural activation in human amygdala involved in aversive conditioning of face and voice. Are irrational reactions to unfairness truly emotionally-driven? Dissociated behavioural and emotional responses in the Ultimatum Game task. Cardiac defense response as a predictor of fear learning. Fear generalization in humans: impact of verbal instructions. Neurobiological basis of failure to recall extinction memory in posttraumatic stress disorder. Failure to loose fear: The impact of cognitive load and trait anxiety on extinction. Appetitive vs. defensive responses to emotional cues. Autonomic measures and brain oscillation modulation. Time-series analysis for rapid event-related skin conductance responses. Disentangling emotion processes in borderline personality disorder: physiological and self-reported assessment of biological vulnerability, baseline intensity, and reactivity to emotionally evocative stimuli. Investigating the impact of sex and cortisol on implicit fear conditioning with fMRI. Chills as an indicator of individual emotional peaks. Experimental assessment of affective processing in fibromyalgia. Subliminal fear priming potentiates negative facial reactions to food pictures in women with anorexia nervosa. Looming sounds as warning signals: the function of motion cues. Dysfunctional cognitive appraisal and psychophysiological reactivity in acute stress disorder. Thought suppression failures in combat PTSD: a cognitive load hypothesis. Anxiety sensitivity, acute nicotine withdrawal symptoms, and anxious and fearful responding to bodily sensations: a laboratory test. Body-related film clip triggers desire to binge in women with binge eating disorder. An alternative scoring method for skin conductance responding in a differential fear conditioning paradigm with a long-duration conditioned stimulus. Generalization of conditioned fear along a dimension of increasing fear intensity. The relationship among neuregulin 1-stimulated phosphorylation of AKT, psychosis proneness, and habituation of arousal in nonclinical individuals. Preoperative stress and anxiety in day-care patients and inpatients undergoing fast-track surgery. Safety behaviours preserve threat beliefs: Protection from extinction of human fear conditioning by an avoidance response. Emotional learning during dissociative states in borderline personality disorder. Anterior cingulate activity to salient stimuli is modulated by autonomic arousal in posttraumatic stress disorder. How avatar customizability affects children's arousal and subjective presence during junk food-sponsored online video games. The truth about lying: inhibition of the anterior prefrontal cortex improves deceptive behavior. Somatic markers and explicit knowledge are both involved in decision-making. Classically conditioned fear responses are preserved following unilateral temporal lobectomy in humans when concurrent US-expectancy ratings are used. [Arousal versus threat when inducing an anxiety reaction]. Neurophysiological response to emotional faces with increasing intensity of fear: a skin conductance response study. Method development studies for repeatedly measuring anxiolytic drug effects in healthy humans. Thinking like a trader selectively reduces individuals' loss aversion. The role of mirror neurons in processing vocal emotions: evidence from psychophysiological data. Experiencing and regulating sadness: physiological and cognitive effects. Mindfulness meditation for symptom reduction in fibromyalgia: psychophysiological correlates. The interactive effect of anxiety sensitivity and frequency of marijuana use in terms of anxious responding to bodily sensations among youth. fMRI-activation patterns in the detection of concealed information rely on memory-related effects. Associations between emotional avoidance, anxiety sensitivity, and reactions to an observational fear challenge procedure. The development of an attentional bias for angry faces following Pavlovian fear conditioning. Sleep promotes generalization of extinction of conditioned fear. Electrodermal reactivity to emotion processing in adults with autistic spectrum disorders. Improving the performance of physiologic hot flash measures with support vector machines. Psychophysiological responding to emotional memories in healthy young men after cortisol and propranolol administration. Distinct effects of {delta}9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol on neural activation during emotional processing. Reduced heart rate variability and vagal tone in anxiety: trait versus state, and the effects of autogenic training. Attenuation of positive and negative affect in men and women at increased risk for hypertension: a function of endogenous barostimulation? Autonomic responses to dynamic displays of facial expressions in adolescents and adults with Williams syndrome. Emotions in Go/NoGo conflicts. Learning affective values for faces is expressed in amygdala and fusiform gyrus. Emotional modulation of autonomic responses to painful trigeminal stimulation. Changes in skin conductance as a tool to monitor nociceptive stimulation and pain. Fearful imagery in social phobia: generalization, comorbidity, and physiological reactivity. Extinction memory is impaired in schizophrenia. Affective response to eye contact and face recognition ability in children with ASD. Both predator and prey: emotional arousal in threat and reward. Evidence for expectancy as a mediator of avoidance and anxiety in a laboratory model of human avoidance learning. Emotion and lying in a non-native language. The effects of voluntary regulation of positive and negative emotion on psychophysiological responsiveness. Fear relevancy, strategy use, and probabilistic learning of cue-outcome associations. System identification of skin conductance response in depression - an attempt to probe the neurochemistry of limbic system. A neuroanatomical dissociation for emotion induced by music. Recognition without awareness in a patient with simultanagnosia. Does vivid emotional imagery depend on body signals? The use of an unpleasant sound unconditional stimulus in an aversive conditioning procedure with 8- to 11-year-old children. Tactile-emotion synesthesia. The relation between catastrophizing and facial responsiveness to pain. Covert detection of attractiveness among the neurologically intact: evidence from skin-conductance responses. Observing virtual arms that you imagine are yours increases the galvanic skin response to an unexpected threat. Modulation of the startle reflex by pleasant and unpleasant music. Anticipation of interoceptive threat in highly anxiety sensitive persons. Prospective prediction of posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms using fear potentiated auditory startle responses. The validity of finger pulse line length for the detection of concealed information. Cocaine cue versus cocaine dosing in humans: evidence for distinct neurophysiological response profiles. Combining physiological measures in the detection of concealed information. Insular activity during passive viewing of aversive stimuli reflects individual differences in state negative affect. Psychophysiological, behavioral, and cognitive indices of the emotional response: a factor-analytic study. Deficits in early emotional reactivity in alexithymia. Reappraisal (but not distraction) is going to make you sweat: physiological evidence for self-control effort. Effects of unexpected chords and of performer's expression on brain responses and electrodermal activity. Evaluating patient anxiety levels during contact lens fitting. Regulating the expectation of reward via cognitive strategies. Effect of risperidone versus haloperidol on emotional responding in schizophrenic patients. Contextual fear conditioning in humans: cortical-hippocampal and amygdala contributions. Experimentally induced mood changes preferentially affect pain unpleasantness. Is eye to eye contact really threatening and avoided in social anxiety?--An eye-tracking and psychophysiology study. Electrocortical and electrodermal responses covary as a function of emotional arousal: a single-trial analysis. In dubio pro defensio: initial activation of conditioned fear is not cue specific. Fear conditioning in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and Alzheimer's disease. The NMDA agonist D-cycloserine facilitates fear memory consolidation in humans. Electrodermal and phasic heart rate responses in the Guilty Actions Test: comparing guilty examinees to informed and uninformed innocents. Watching emotional movies: affective reactions and gender differences. Undifferentiation of somatic responses to emotions in a case of functional amnesia. Acute dissociation predicts rapid habituation of skin conductance responses to aversive auditory probes. Seeing direct and averted gaze activates the approach-avoidance motivational brain systems. Negative self-focused cognitions mediate the effect of trait social anxiety on state anxiety. Effect of Healing Touch on stress perception and biological correlates. Presence and acquired origin of reduced recall for fear extinction in PTSD: results of a twin study. Prenatal origins of temperamental reactivity in early infancy. Empathy-related responses to moving film stimuli depicting human and non-human animal targets in negative circumstances. The pupil as a measure of emotional arousal and autonomic activation. The psychophysiology of James Bond: phasic emotional responses to violent video game events. Physiological arousal, distress tolerance, and social problem-solving deficits among adolescent self-injurers. The influence of pain catastrophizing on experimentally induced emotion and emotional modulation of nociception. The renewal of extinguished conditioned fear with fear-relevant and fear-irrelevant stimuli by a context change after extinction. Anxiety impairs decision-making: psychophysiological evidence from an Iowa Gambling Task. Age differences in perception and awareness of emotion. Failure to condition to a cue is associated with sustained contextual fear. Emotions over time: synchronicity and development of subjective, physiological, and facial affective reactions to music. Under what conditions can human affective conditioning occur without contingency awareness? Test of the evaluative conditioning paradigm. Autonomic and prefrontal cortex responses to autobiographical recall of emotions. Failure of extinction of fear responses in posttraumatic stress disorder: evidence from second-order conditioning. Transformation of the discriminative and eliciting functions of generalized relational stimuli. A rose by any other name: would it smell as sweet? Automatic quantitative evaluation of emotions in E-learning applications. Affective modulation of eyeblink reactions to noxious sural nerve stimulation: a supraspinal measure of nociceptive reactivity? The startle reflex in alcohol-dependent patients: changes after cognitive-behavioral therapy and predictive validity for drinking behavior. A pilot study. Exogenous testosterone attenuates the integrated central stress response in healthy young women. Fear of pain and defensive activation. Social anxiety predicts unconsciously provoked emotional responses to facial expression. Types of aggression, responsiveness to provocation, and callous-unemotional traits in detained adolescents. Dissociation of sad facial expressions and autonomic nervous system responding in boys with disruptive behavior disorders. Fear conditioning and affective modulation of the startle reflex in male adolescents with early-onset or adolescence-onset conduct disorder and healthy control subjects. Dose-related anxiogenic effect of glycine in the elevated plus maze and in electrodermal activity. A role for the human dorsal anterior cingulate cortex in fear expression. Sympathetic arousal to a vestibular stressor in high and low hostile men. Emotional control of nociceptive reactions (ECON): do affective valence and arousal play a role? Facial EMG as an index of affective response to nicotine. The genetic covariation between fear conditioning and self-report fears. Fear conditioning in panic disorder: Enhanced resistance to extinction. Parent-child relationship, temperament, and physiological reactions to fear-inducing film clips: further evidence for differential susceptibility. Speech anxiety and rapid emotional reactions to angry and happy facial expressions. Activity in the human amygdala corresponds to early, rather than late period autonomic responses to a signal for shock. The effects of difficulty and gain versus loss on vocal physiology and acoustics. Physiological correlates of eye movement desensitization and reprocessing. Blood pressure biofeedback exerts intermediate-term effects on blood pressure and pressure reactivity in individuals with mild hypertension: a randomized controlled study. Neuroticism is associated with larger and more prolonged electrodermal responses to emotionally evocative pictures. Arousal and attention: picture size and emotional reactions. Personality change at the intersection of autonomic arousal and stress. The Facial Expression Coding System (FACES): development, validation, and utility. Regulation of emotions during experimental stress in alexithymia. The influence of conditioned fear on human pain thresholds: does preparedness play a role? Changes in self-perceived role identity modulate pain perception. Validation of a Swedish short self-report measure of core affect. Relationships between musical structure and psychophysiological measures of emotion. Stress-response-dampening effects of alcohol: attention as a mediator and moderator. Associations between childhood trauma and emotion-modulated psychophysiological responses to startling sounds: a study of police cadets. Limbic and prefrontal responses to facial emotion expressions in depersonalization. IAPS includes photographs that elicit low-arousal physiological responses in healthy volunteers. Skin conductance responses as predictor of emotional responses to stressful life events. Does incongruence of lexicosemantic and prosodic information cause discernible cognitive conflict? Fear conditioning in posttraumatic stress disorder: evidence for delayed extinction of autonomic, experiential, and behavioural responses. Sensitivity to masked conditioned stimuli predicts conditioned response magnitude under masked conditions. Contextual-specificity of short-delay extinction in humans: renewal of fear-potentiated startle in a virtual environment. Physiological correlates of anxiety in children with gender identity disorder. Fronto-limbic and autonomic disjunctions to negative emotion distinguish schizophrenia subtypes. The effects of lorazepam on skin conductance responses to aversive stimuli in healthy subjects. Emotional and physiological responses of fluent listeners while watching the speech of adults who stutter. The role of fear of emotion in distress, arousal, and cognitive interference following an emotional stimulus. Autonomic reactivity to induced emotion as potential predictor of response to antidepressant treatment. Subjective and physiological responses to emotion-eliciting pictures in male schizophrenic patients. Effects of music on the recovery of autonomic and electrocortical activity after stress induced by aversive visual stimuli. Fear of losing money? Aversive conditioning with secondary reinforcers. Elevated emotional reactivity in affective but not cognitive components of theory of mind: a psychophysiological study. Dissociation, memory commission errors, and heightened autonomic reactivity. Modulation of corticospinal activity by strong emotions evoked by pictures and classical music: a transcranial magnetic stimulation study. Sex differences in neural responses to disgusting visual stimuli: implications for disgust-related psychiatric disorders. The effect of pain-related fear on sexual arousal in women with superficial dyspareunia. Physiological reactions of preschoolers to fear-inducing film clips: effects of temperamental fearfulness and quality of the parent-child relationship. Physiologic correlates of perceived therapist empathy and social-emotional process during psychotherapy. Covariations among fMRI, skin conductance, and behavioral data during processing of concealed information. Optimised attribute selection for emotion classification using physiological signals. What happens in the course of body exposure? Emotional, cognitive, and physiological reactions to mirror confrontation in eating disorders. Affective biasing of choices in gambling task decision making. Fear acquisition requires awareness in trace but not delay conditioning. Recall of fear extinction in humans activates the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and hippocampus in concert. Fear conditioning and extinction: influence of sex and menstrual cycle in healthy humans. Human amygdala activity during the expression of fear responses. Changes in implicit associations do not occur simultaneously to Pavlovian conditioning of physiological anxiety responses. Slow habituation of arousal associated with psychosis proneness. Amygdala dysfunction in men with the fragile X premutation. Role of relaxation and specific suggestions in hypnotic emotional numbing. Effects of postural anxiety on the soleus H-reflex. Regulation of emotional responses elicited by threat-related stimuli. The effect of content and physical properties of affective pictures on emotional responses. Affective modulation of pain in substance-dependent veterans. Schedule-induced electrodermal responding in children. Autonomic response in the perception of disgust and happiness in depersonalization disorder. Role of the amygdala in decisions under ambiguity and decisions under risk: evidence from patients with Urbach-Wiethe disease. Skin conductance responses to masked conditioned stimuli: phylogenetic/ontogenetic factors versus direction of threat? Affective modulation of autonomic reactions to noxious stimulation. The repeated confrontation with videotapes of spiders in multiple contexts attenuates renewal of fear in spider-anxious students. The role of awareness in delay and trace fear conditioning in humans. Electrodermal responses to words in chronic low back pain patients: a comparison between pain descriptors, other emotional words, and neutral words. A randomized controlled trial of the effect of D-cycloserine on extinction and fear conditioning in humans. Awareness of subtle emotional feelings: a comparison of long-term meditators and nonmeditators. Emotion induction after direct intracerebral stimulations of human amygdala. Phylo- and ontogenetic fears and the expectation of danger: differences between spider- and flight-phobic subjects in cognitive and physiological responses to disorder-specific stimuli. Hypothalamus pituitary adrenal axis and autonomic activity during stress in delinquent male adolescents and controls. Distinguishing emotional from physical activation in ambulatory psychophysiological monitoring. Dissociation of physiology and behavior in PTSD. East Indian Sandalwood and alpha-santalol odor increase physiological and self-rated arousal in humans. Rapid picture presentation and affective engagement. Emotional arousal in agenesis of the corpus callosum. Drugs, sweat, and fears: a comparison of the effects of diazepam and methylphenidate on fear conditioning. The effect of emotional distance on psychophysiologic concordance and perceived empathy between patient and interviewer. Relaxation versus cognitive therapies for dental fear--a psychophysiological approach. Finger pulse waveform length in the detection of concealed information. Association between hot flashes, sleep complaints, and psychological functioning among healthy menopausal women. "Missing links" in borderline personality disorder: loss of neural synchrony relates to lack of emotion regulation and impulse control. Dissociation of neural responses and skin conductance reactions during fear conditioning with and without awareness of stimulus contingencies. Differential subjective and psychophysiological responses to socially and nonsocially generated emotional stimuli. Effects of picture content and intensity on affective physiological response. Application of video glasses for sustained affective picture presentations: a comparison with video projector presentations. The emotional consequences of social pragmatism: the psychophysiological correlates of self-monitoring. Normal physiological emotions but differences in expression of conscious feelings in children with high-functioning autism. Predicting severity of non-clinical depression: preliminary findings using an integrated approach. Simulation of the geomagnetic field experienced by the International Space Station in its revolution around the Earth: effects on psychophysiological responses to affective picture viewing. Gender specific effects of a mild stressor on alcohol cue reactivity in heavy social drinkers. The influence of trait anxiety on autonomic response and cognitive performance during an anticipatory anxiety task. Unconscious responses to threatening pictures: interactive effect of trait anxiety and social desirability on skin conductance responses. Affective state and decision-making in the Ultimatum Game. Resistance to extinction in evaluative conditioning. Measuring craving: an attempt to connect subjective craving with cue reactivity. The influence of autonomic arousal and semantic relatedness on memory for emotional words. Psychophysiological anticipation of positive outcomes promotes advantageous decision-making in normal older persons. Skin conductance responses are elicited by the airway sensory effects of puffs from cigarettes. Gastric myoelectrical activity as an index of emotional arousal. Local back massage with an automated massage chair: general muscle and psychophysiologic relaxing properties. The clinical relevance of psychophysiology: support for the psychobiology of empathy and psychodynamic process. The worried mind: autonomic and prefrontal activation during worrying. Sensation seeking and the aversive motivational system. Psychopathy, startle blink modulation, and electrodermal reactivity in twin men. Fear conditioning following unilateral temporal lobectomy: dissociation of conditioned startle potentiation and autonomic learning. Effects of suppression and acceptance on emotional responses of individuals with anxiety and mood disorders. Autonomic correlates of social anxiety and embarrassment in shy and non-shy individuals. Amygdala-prefrontal dissociation of subliminal and supraliminal fear. Association of neural and physiological responses during voluntary emotion suppression. Blood pressure changes highlight gender differences in emotional reactivity to arousing pictures. The role of emotional responses and physiological reactivity in the marital conflict-child functioning link. Stress differentially modulates fear conditioning in healthy men and women. The somatic marker hypothesis: a critical evaluation. Height effects in real and virtual environments. Characterization of a 7% carbon dioxide (CO2) inhalation paradigm to evoke anxiety symptoms in healthy subjects. Anxiety trait modulates psychophysiological reactions, but not habituation processes related to affective auditory stimuli. Anomalous anticipatory skin conductance response to acoustic stimuli: experimental results and speculation about a mechanism. May et al.'s "anomalous anticipatory skin conductance response to acoustic stimuli". Psychophysiological profiles of batterers: autonomic emotional reactivity as it predicts the antisocial spectrum of behavior among intimate partner abusers. Subchronic treatment with amino acid mixture of L-lysine and L-arginine modifies neuroendocrine activation during psychosocial stress in subjects with high trait anxiety. Therapist sensitivity towards emotional life-career issues and the working alliance with suicide attempters. Distinct amygdala-autonomic arousal profiles in response to fear signals in healthy males and females. Affective reactions to pictures of ingroup and outgroup members. Dissociation of emotional processes in response to visual and olfactory stimuli following frontotemporal damage. Toward an integrated profile of depression: evidence from the brain resource international database. Thickness of ventromedial prefrontal cortex in humans is correlated with extinction memory. Context modulation of memory for fear extinction in humans. Reinstatement of conditioned fear in humans is context dependent and impaired in amnesia. Positron emission tomographic imaging of neural correlates of a fear acquisition and extinction paradigm in women with childhood sexual-abuse-related post-traumatic stress disorder. Deficient fear conditioning in psychopathy: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. From emotion perception to emotion experience: emotions evoked by pictures and classical music. Physiological responsivity to emotional pictures in schizophrenia. Diazepam suppresses the acquisition but not the expression of 'fear-potentiation' of the acoustic startle response in man. Affective reactivity in language: the role of psychophysiological arousal. Prediction of subjective states from psychophysiology: a multivariate approach. Up- and down-regulating facial disgust: affective, vagal, sympathetic, and respiratory consequences. Subjective and neurovegetative changes in healthy volunteers and panic patients performing simulated public speaking. The role of the human amygdala in the production of conditioned fear responses. Effortless control: executive attention and conscious feeling of mental effort are dissociable. Functional dissociation of amygdala-modulated arousal and cognitive appraisal, in Turner syndrome. Hemodynamic responses of the amygdala, the orbitofrontal cortex and the visual cortex during a fear conditioning paradigm. The neuropsychology of fear learning and fear regulation. Diurnal autonomic variations and emotional reactivity. Effects of lorazepam on fear-potentiated startle responses in man. The influence of anxiety on electrodermal responses to distractors. Maternal psychophysiological change during the second half of gestation. Emotional response in patients with frontal brain damage: effects of affective valence and information content. Cognitive performance and autonomic reactivity in abstinent drug abusers and nonusers. Autonomic effects of expressive writing in individuals with elevated blood pressure. Return of fear in a human differential conditioning paradigm caused by a stimulus change after extinction. Emotional antecedents of hot flashes during daily life. [Event-related synchronization and desynchronization of EEG during perception of emotional stimuli: association with autonomous nervous system activity]. Effect of health-related stereotypes on physiological responses of hypertensive middle-aged and older men. Artificial time constraints on the Iowa Gambling Task: the effects on behavioural performance and subjective experience. Respiratory responses associated with affective processing of film stimuli. BOLD, sweat and fears: fMRI and skin conductance distinguish facial fear signals. Relationships between temperament dimensions in personality and unconscious emotional responses. High trait anxiety in healthy subjects is associated with low neuroendocrine activity during psychosocial stress. Learned fear of "unseen" faces after Pavlovian, observational, and instructed fear. Effects of naltrexone on the subjective response to amphetamine in healthy volunteers. Cognitive enhancers as adjuncts to psychotherapy: use of D-cycloserine in phobic individuals to facilitate extinction of fear. Error-related psychophysiology and negative affect. Fear-induced hypoalgesia in humans: effects on low intensity thermal stimulation and finger temperature. Stress responsivity in children with externalizing behavior disorders. Intrusive and non-intrusive memories in a non-clinical sample: the effects of mood and affect on imagery vividness. [Clinical significance of stress reactivity for frequency of electric shock discharges in patients with implanted cardioverter-defibrillators]. Effect of stimulus type and worry on physiological response to fear. Generalization of extinguished skin conductance responding in human fear conditioning. Brain activity underlying emotional valence and arousal: a response-related fMRI study. Attentional functions in speech fluency disorders. Role of suggestion in odor-induced mood change. Modulation of event-related brain potentials during affective picture processing: a complement to startle reflex and skin conductance response? Interhemispheric difference in emotional response without awareness. The dynamics of cortico-amygdala and autonomic activity over the experimental time course of fear perception. The effects of guided imagery relaxation in people with COPD. Respiratory responses during affective picture viewing. Differential relations between heart rate and skin conductance, and public speaking anxiety. Transdermal absorption of (-)-linalool induces autonomic deactivation but has no impact on ratings of well-being in humans. Autonomic responding to aversive words without conscious valence discrimination. Affective and physiological responses to environmental noises and music. Psychophysiological responding during script-driven imagery in people reporting abduction by space aliens. The psychophysiology of the maternal-fetal relationship. Lysine fortification reduces anxiety and lessens stress in family members in economically weak communities in Northwest Syria. Psychophysiological reactions in dental phobic patients with direct vs. indirect fear acquisition. Attentional, emotional and hormonal data in subjects of different ages. Avoidance-oriented coping as a predictor of panic-related distress: a test using biological challenge. Evidence of fearlessness in behaviourally disordered children: a study on startle reflex modulation. Reactions to facial expressions: effects of social context and speech anxiety on responses to neutral, anger, and joy expressions. Effects of the beta-blocker propranolol on cued and contextual fear conditioning in humans. Emotional activation of obese and normal women due to imagery and food content of verbal stimuli in a memory task. Dysregulation of arousal and amygdala-prefrontal systems in paranoid schizophrenia. Psychopathy and physiological response to emotionally evocative sounds. Appropriate presentation of skin conductance accuracy with the Guilty Knowledge Test. Mapping the time course of nonconscious and conscious perception of fear: an integration of central and peripheral measures. Preparing patients for gastrointestinal endoscopy: the influence of information in medical situations. Neural substrates mediating human delay and trace fear conditioning. Autonomic specificity of discrete emotion and dimensions of affective space: a multivariate approach. Respiratory sinus arrhythmia as an index of emotional response in young adults. Reactivity to imagery and nocturnal panic attacks. Expression of conditional fear with and without awareness. Children's physiological indices of empathy and their socioemotional adjustment: does caregivers' expressivity matter? Processing of the arousal of subliminal and supraliminal emotional stimuli by the human amygdala. A change of heart: cardiovascular correlates of forgiveness in response to interpersonal conflict. Fear-potentiated startle and posttraumatic stress symptoms in urban police officers. Fetal response to induced maternal stress. The effects of vasopressin on human facial responses related to social communication. Cortical neurophysiology of anticipatory anxiety: an investigation utilizing steady state probe topography (SSPT). Effects of left amygdala lesions on respiration, skin conductance, heart rate, anxiety, and activity of the right amygdala during anticipation of negative stimulus. Individual differences in the emotional reaction to shock determine whether hypoalgesia is observed. Emotional information processing in patients with narcolepsy: a psychophysiologic investigation. Emotion and motivation I: defensive and appetitive reactions in picture processing. Objective measurement of patient's dental anxiety by galvanic skin reaction. Offset control during recurrent 20% carbon dioxide-enriched air induction: relation to individual difference variables. The informational impact of mood on effort mobilization: a study of cardiovascular and electrodermal responses. Gender differences in the processing of standardized emotional visual stimuli in humans: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Emotional arousal does not affect delay eyeblink conditioning. A twin study of the genetics of fear conditioning. Evaluating anxiety in patients attending optometric practice. The Guilty Knowledge Test and the modified Stroop task in detection of deception: an exploratory study. Decoupling of autonomic and cognitive emotional reactions after cerebellar stroke. Pharmacology of human experimental anxiety. Neocortical modulation of the amygdala response to fearful stimuli. Embarrassment and social phobia: the role of parasympathetic activation. Effects of effort and distress coping processes on psychophysiological and psychological stress responses. Anticipatory anxiety in moderately to highly-anxious oral surgery patients as a screening model for anxiolytics: evaluation of alprazolam. Interest value, meaningfulness, and familiarity of words: relations with other word properties. Parental presence during induction of anesthesia: physiological effects on parents. Psychophysiological correlates of affects in human olfaction. The amygdala response to emotional stimuli: a comparison of faces and scenes. Face recognition and emotional valence: processing without awareness by neurologically intact participants does not simulate covert recognition in prosopagnosia. Asymmetric functional roles of right and left ventromedial prefrontal cortices in social conduct, decision-making, and emotional processing. Attentional and physiological characteristics of patients with dental anxiety. Neural correlates of feeling sympathy. Cortisol, prolactin, growth hormone and neurovegetative responses to emotions elicited during an hypnoidal state. Buspirone decreases physiological reactivity to unconditioned and conditioned aversive stimuli. Development of alcohol-associated cues and cue-induced brain activation in alcoholics. Autonomic nervous system responses to odours: the role of pleasantness and arousal. Airway response of healthy individuals to affective picture series. Resistance to extinction of conditioned electrodermal responses: a study of the incubation fear hypothesis. Lateralized changes in autonomic arousal during emotional processing in patients with unilateral temporal lobe seizure onset. Effects of affective picture viewing and imagery on respiratory resistance in nonasthmatic individuals. Autonomic response in depersonalization disorder. Physiological arousal in females with fragile X or Turner syndrome. Observational, physiological, and self-report measures of children's anger: relations to reactive versus proactive aggression. Event-related skin conductance responses to musical emotions in humans. Anticipatory autonomic response to a public speaking task in women: the role of trait anxiety. Continuous performance test differences among schizophrenic out-patients living in high and low expressed emotion environments. Associative learning deficits increase symptoms of anxiety in humans. [Coping styles and anxiety and physiological responses of teachers in stressful situations]. The psychophysiology of real-time financial risk processing. Electrodermal responses: what happens in the brain. Impaired fear conditioning in Alzheimer's disease. The impact of anxiety sensitivity, bodily expectations, and cultural beliefs on menstrual symptom reporting: a test of the menstrual reactivity hypothesis. Time-dependent cortical asymmetries induced by emotional arousal: EEG analysis of event-related synchronization and desynchronization in individually defined frequency bands. Influence of affective and cognitive judgments on autonomic parameters during inhalation of pleasant and unpleasant odors in humans. A repressive coping style and affective, facial and physiological responses to looking at emotional pictures. Gender differences in cardiovascular and electrodermal responses to public speaking task: the role of anxiety and mood states. Comparison between two models of experimental anxiety in healthy volunteers and panic disorder patients. Fear conditioned changes of heart rate in patients with medial cerebellar lesions. Physiological and psychological reactivity in women with asthma: the effects of anxiety and menstrual cycle phase. Do panic patients process unconditioned fear vs. conditioned anxiety differently than normal subjects? Social anxiety and response to touch: incongruence between self-evaluative and physiological reactions. Arousal dissociates amygdala and hippocampal fear responses: evidence from simultaneous fMRI and skin conductance recording. Constraint, alcoholism, and electrodermal response in aversive classical conditioning and mismatch novelty paradigms. Conditioned inhibition of fear-potentiated startle and skin conductance in humans. Context-dependent effects of steroid chemosignals on human physiology and mood. Repeated exposure of flight phobics to flights in virtual reality. The cue-availability paradigm: the effects of cigarette availability on cue reactivity in smokers. Opposite effects of nefazodone in two human models of anxiety. Slow recovery from voluntary hyperventilation in panic disorder. Psychophysiological reactions in dental phobic patients during video stimulation. Personality profiles and heart rate variability (vagal tone) in children with recurrent abdominal pain. The joint impact of mood state and task difficulty on cardiovascular and electrodermal reactivity in active coping. Affective reactions to briefly presented pictures. Emotional reactions in children: verbal, physiological, and behavioral responses to affective pictures. Human fear conditioning is related to dopaminergic and serotonergic biological markers. Granting forgiveness or harboring grudges: implications for emotion, physiology, and health. Double-blind, placebo-controlled psychometric studies on the effects of a combined estrogen-progestin regimen versus estrogen alone on performance, mood and personality of menopausal syndrome patients. Effects of 5 s exposures to a 50 microT, 20 Hz magnetic field on skin conductance and ratings of affect and arousal. Effects of chiral fragrances on human autonomic nervous system parameters and self-evaluation. The effect of UCS inflation and deflation procedures on 'fear' conditioning. Activation of the left amygdala to a cognitive representation of fear. Facial and autonomic activity in depression: social context differences during imagery. Elite pistol shooters: physiological patterning of best vs. worst shots. Emotional memories: the relationship between age of memory and the corresponding psychophysiological responses. Pain and emotion: effects of affective picture modulation. Emotional responses in patients with borderline as compared with avoidant personality disorder. Psychophysiological responses to the Stroop Task after a maximal cycle ergometry in elite sportsmen and physically active subjects. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and autonomic nervous system activity in disruptive children and matched controls. Limbic activation and psychophysiologic responses to aversive visual stimuli. Interaction with cognitive task. Effects of food on cortisol and mood in vulnerable subjects under controllable and uncontrollable stress. Protection from extinction in human fear conditioning. Physiological modifications and increase in state anxiety in volunteers submitted to the Stroop Color-Word Interference Test: A preliminary study. Psychophysiological reactivity to stress in nail biters. Psychophysiological, somatic, and affective changes across the menstrual cycle in women with panic disorder. The effect of graded aversive stimuli on limbic and visual activation. Masked fear words produce increased SCRs: an anomaly for Ohman's theory of pre-attentive processing in anxiety. Pavlovian aversive and appetitive odor conditioning in humans: subjective, peripheral, and electrocortical changes. Emotions and stress increase respiratory resistance in asthma. The acute physiological and mood effects of tea and coffee: the role of caffeine level. The bovine protein alpha-lactalbumin increases the plasma ratio of tryptophan to the other large neutral amino acids, and in vulnerable subjects raises brain serotonin activity, reduces cortisol concentration, and improves mood under stress. Repressive-defensive style and physiological reactivity among children and adolescents with asthma. Cardiac responses associated with affective processing of unpleasant film stimuli. Relationship between properties of words and elicitation of skin conductance response. Corticosterone response to the plus-maze: high correlation with risk assessment in rats and mice. Relaxation training inhibits fear and arousal during in vivo exposure to phobia-cue stimuli. Fear and anxiety: divergent effects on human pain thresholds. Frontal lobe lesions and electrodermal activity: effects of significance. Affective responsiveness in borderline personality disorder: a psychophysiological approach. Emotional impairment after right orbitofrontal lesion in a patient without cognitive deficits. Response patterns to repeated CO2 inhalation in individuals with high anxiety sensitivity. Emotionality of words as related to vividness of imagery and concreteness. Dissociation between autonomic responding and verbal report in right and left hemisphere brain damage during anticipatory anxiety. Emotion processing in three systems: the medium and the message. Effects of stimulus intensity, risetime, and duration on autonomic and behavioral responding: implications for the differentiation of orienting, startle, and defense responses. Nonaware classical conditioning to pictorial facial stimuli in a between-groups paradigm. Different contributions of the human amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex to decision-making. Worry affects the immune response to phobic fear. Emotion-processing deficit in alexithymia. A functional anatomy of anticipatory anxiety. [Forgetting of word associations in relation to indicators of emotionality. A possibility for evaluating Freud's concept of repression?]. Voluntary breath holding in panic and generalized anxiety disorders. Extinction in fear conditioning: effects on startle modulation and evaluative self-reports. Psychophysiologic responsivity in posttraumatic stress disorder: generalized hyperresponsiveness versus trauma specificity. The relation between skin conductance level and plus-maze behavior in male mice. Autonomic instability during relaxation in panic disorder. Anxiety and pain: epinephrine-induced hyperalgesia and attentional influences. Does carbohydrate-rich, protein-poor food prevent a deterioration of mood and cognitive performance of stress-prone subjects when subjected to a stressful task? An exploratory study of musical emotions and psychophysiology. Discriminative stimulus properties of low doses of ethanol in humans. Coping with pain produced by physical activity in persons with chronic low back pain: immediate assessment following a specific pain event. An acute dose of nicotine enhances cue-induced cocaine craving. Sex differences in emotion: expression, experience, and physiology. Emotional conditioning to masked stimuli: expectancies for aversive outcomes following nonrecognized fear-relevant stimuli. Habituation of cognitive and physiological arousal and social anxiety. EEG-driven photic stimulation effect on plasma cortisol and beta-endorphin. The effects of social context and defensiveness on the physiological responses of repressive copers. Effects of hot tea, coffee and water ingestion on physiological responses and mood: the role of caffeine, water and beverage type. The stress of Stroop performance: physiological and emotional responses to color-word interference, task pacing, and pacing speed. Acute and delayed effects of alprazolam on flight phobics during exposure. The influence of affective factors on time perception. Eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing versus exposure in vivo. A single-session crossover study of spider-phobic children. The effect of emotional and attentional processes on blink startle modulation and on electrodermal responses. Psychology of computer use: XLII. Problem solving and humor as a function of computer anxiety. Autonomic nervous system response patterns specificity to basic emotions. Ritanserin facilitates anxiety in a simulated public-speaking paradigm. Picture media and emotion: effects of a sustained affective context. Individual differences in emotion regulation and behavior problems in preschool children. On the interaction of hypnotizability and negative affect in chronic pain. Implications for the somatization of trauma. Effect of d-fenfluramine on human experimental anxiety. The use of a dual-task procedure for the assessment of cognitive effort associated with cigarette craving. Peripheral cuing of covert spatial attention before and after emotional conditioning of the cue. Anxiety and pain: attentional and endorphinergic influences. Conditioning with facial expressions of emotion: effects of CS sex and age. UCS inflation and human aversive autonomic conditioning. What's the fear of? Using implosion to explore the bodily-injury fear complex. Role of 5-HT in stress, anxiety, and depression. Do schizophrenic patients show a disjunctive relationship among expressive, experiential, and psychophysiological components of emotion? Emotional arousal in temporal lobectomy: autonomic and performance effects of success and failure feedback. Assessment of female sexual arousal: response specificity and construct validity. Psychophysiological responses as indices of affective dimensions. Emotional modulation of skin conductance and eyeblink responses to startle probe. Fanning old flames: emotional and cognitive effects of suppressing thoughts of a past relationship. [Family intervention for schizophrenia based on expressed emotion (EE) research: a review of the technique and evaluation]. Effects of relaxation training on fear and arousal during in vivo exposure to a caged snake among DSM-III-R simple (snake) phobics. Baroreceptor cortical effects, emotions and pain. Electrocortical, autonomic, and subjective responses to rhythmic audio-visual stimulation. The effect of prior fear levels on UCS-expectancy ratings to a fear-relevant stimulus. Electrodermal palmar asymmetry and nostril dominance. Reanalysis of SCOR and anxiety measures in the Israeli High-Risk Study. Children's emotional and physiological responses to interadult angry behavior: the role of history of interparental hostility. The body's response to processing emotional trauma: linking verbal text with autonomic activity. Physiological responses to child stimuli in mothers with and without a childhood history of physical abuse. Control and attention during exposure influence arousal and fear among insect phobics. Salience of fear/threat in the affective modulation of the human startle blink. Emotional imagery and physical anhedonia. Skin conductance responses in patients sedated with midazolam or propofol. Skin conductance, Marlowe-Crowne defensiveness, and dental anxiety. Nonconscious associative learning: Pavlovian conditioning of skin conductance responses to masked fear-relevant facial stimuli. Dissociation of autonomic and subjective responses to emotional slides in right hemisphere damaged patients. Individual differences in preschoolers' physiological and verbal responses to videotaped angry interactions. Home measures of anxiety, avoidant coping and defence as predictors of anxiety, heart rate and skin conductance level just before invasive cardiovascular procedures. "Unconscious anxiety": phobic responses to masked stimuli. Is the hypnotized subject lying? The influence of anxiety on pain: attentional and attributional mediators. The effect of personal protective equipment on high-and low-dental fear patients. [Skin conduction as an indicator of cognitive and emotional processes]. Conscious and nonconscious processes: an ERP index of an anticipatory response in a conditioning paradigm using visually masked stimuli. Effects of UCS intensity and duration of exposure of nonreinforced CS on conditioned electrodermal responses: an experimental analysis of the incubation theory of anxiety. Skin conductance responses to auditory stimuli and anticipatory responses before venepuncture in patients premedicated with diazepam or morphine. Backward masking and skin conductance responses after conditioning to nonfeared but fear-relevant stimuli in fearful subjects. Emotional learning, hedonic change, and the startle probe. Anxiety, attention and pain. The psychophysiology of disgust: differentiating negative emotional contexts with facial EMG. Looking at pictures: affective, facial, visceral, and behavioral reactions. Psychophysiologic assessment of traumatic imagery in Israeli civilian patients with posttraumatic stress disorder. Sensitization and aversive conditioning: effects on the startle reflex and electrodermal responding. Motivational similarity and interpersonal evaluations: the role of ambiguity, self-derogation, and emotion. Skin conductance reaction (SCR)-habituation test, an elementary model of anxiety as a tool to assess anxiogenic activities of some drugs. On the automatic nature of phobic fear: conditioned electrodermal responses to masked fear-relevant stimuli. Effects of oxazepam on anxiety: implications for Fowles' psychophysiological interpretation of Gray's model. Tonic and phasic electrodermal measures of human aversive conditioning with long duration stimuli. Affective response to color-slide stimuli in subjects with physical anhedonia: a three-systems analysis. Individual differences in the perception of bodily sensations: the role of trait anxiety and coping style. Emotional coping and tonic blood pressure as determinants of cardiovascular responses to mental stress. Influences of witnessed affect on information processing in children. Effects of social anxiety and facial expression on habituation of the electrodermal orienting response. Early parental death: relation to electrodermal orienting response and gender in schizophrenia. Blushing as a function of audience size. Physiological and subjective effects of traffic noise: the role of negative self-statements. The facilitative effect of facial expression on the self-generation of emotion. Parental expressed emotion and psychophysiological reactivity in disturbed and normal children. Autonomic correlates of illness imagery. Different drink cues elicit different physiological responses in non-dependent drinkers. Pavlovian conditioning of phobic fear: effects on skin and salivary pH. The relations of parental characteristics and practices to children's vicarious emotional responding. Personality and socialization correlates of vicarious emotional responding. Psychophysiological response patterns to positive and negative film stimuli. Heartbeat perception, instructions, and biofeedback in the control of heart rate. Autonomic, neuroendocrine, and subjective responses to emotion-inducing film stimuli. Mechanism of analgesia induced by hypnosis and acupuncture: is there a difference? The roles of deception, intention to deceive, and motivation to avoid detection in the psychophysiological detection of guilty knowledge. Effects of potentially phobic conditioned stimuli on retention, reconditioning, and extinction of the conditioned skin conductance response. Brain asymmetry and human electrodermal conditioning. The effects of false response feedback on human 'fear' conditioning. Attention, not anxiety, influences pain. Psychophysiological response patterns in panic disorder. Habituation and tinnitus: an experimental study. Psychological correlates of nonspecific skin conductance responses. Characterization of a psychophysiological model of classical fear conditioning in healthy volunteers: influence of gender, instruction, personality and placebo. Evaluation of a psychophysiological model of classical fear conditioning in anxious patients. The effects of voluntary hyperventilation on patients with chest pain without coronary artery disease. The effects of incorrect pain expectations on acquired fear and pain responses. Fear relevance and diminution of unconditioned skin conductance responses. Startle reflex modification: emotion or attention? Classical conditioning and attentional bias. Voluntary facial action generates emotion-specific autonomic nervous system activity. Skin conductance habituation in panic disorder patients. Age migraine and achievement motivation related? A psychophysiological study of responses to real-life achievement stress in young headache sufferers. The suppression of exciting thoughts. A 10-year follow-up of patients treated for dental fear. The relationship between cardiovascular responses in the laboratory and in the field. Perceived unpleasantness and facial reactions to auditory stimuli. Eysenck's incubation of fear hypothesis: an experimental test. The autonomic differentiation of emotions revisited: convergent and discriminant validation. Effects of fear-relevance on electrodermal safety signal learning. Responses to smoking-related stimuli and early relapse to smoking. Psychophysiological and subjective reactions of social phobics and normals to facial stimuli. Preparedness and electrodermal fear-conditioning: ontogenetic vs phylogenetic explanations. Influence of CGP 361A, propranolol and diazepam on autonomous reactions to different stressors. Conditioned emotional responding under diazepam: a psychophysiological study of state dependent learning. The effect of hypocapnia on extinction of conditioned fear responses. Expressed emotion research in schizophrenia: theoretical and clinical implications. Nonconscious control of autonomic responses: a role for Pavlovian conditioning? The possible relation of the menstrual cycle to susceptibility to fear acquisition. The assessment of psychophysiological reactivity to the expressed emotion of relatives of schizophrenic patients. Autonomic changes after treatment of agoraphobia with panic attacks. Migraine and defense mechanisms: psychophysiological relationships in young females. Facial reactions, autonomic activity and experienced emotion: a three component model of emotional conditioning. Comparative placebo-controlled pharmacodynamic studies with zotepine and clozapine utilizing pharmaco-EEG and psychometry. Autonomic reactions to social and neutral stimuli in subjects high and low in public speaking fear. Facial reactions to fear-relevant and fear-irrelevant stimuli. Autonomic characteristics of agoraphobia with panic attacks. Skin conductance feedback and panic attacks. The psychopharmacological and electrophysiological effects of single doses of caffeine in healthy human subjects. A method to elicit aggressive feelings and behaviour via provocation. Hemispheric asymmetry and emotion: effects of nonverbal affective stimuli. Giving context emotional significance by administration of aversive pictures. Physiological and subjective stress responses in surgical patients. Behavioral inhibition and electrodermal activity during deception. Contextual stimulus control of conditional vasomotor and electrodermal reactions to angry and friendly faces. Transswitching--yes! Preparedness--No! Language conditioning, emotional instructions, and cognitions in conditioned responses to fear-relevant and fear-irrelevant stimuli. Skin conductance changes and psychotherapeutic content in the treatment of a phobic patient. Affect cognizance and the type A behavior pattern: labeling, cognitive effort or phenomenological loss? The attribution of affect in pain clinic patients: a psychophysiological study of the conversion process. Effect of metergoline on human anxiety. Skin conductance reaction (SCR)-habituation test, a tool to detect anxiolytic activity. Its justification by the correlation between SCR-habituation test activities and specific binding potencies in benzodiazepines. Behavioral effects of caffeine in children. Relationship between dietary choice and effects of caffeine challenge. Psychophysiological assessment of expressed emotion in schizophrenia. A case example. Psychophysiological responses of schizophrenic patients to high and low expressed emotion relatives: a follow-up study. Psychophysiological factors in panic disorder. Autonomic recognition of names and faces in prosopagnosia: a neuropsychological application of the Guilty Knowledge Test. Marital interaction: physiological linkage and affective exchange. Behavioral relaxation training and assessment. Autonomic responses to dental procedures in pedodontic patients during a standard restoration session. Physiological correlates of conduct problems and anxiety in hyperactive and learning-disabled children. Autonomic arousal in eating disorders: further evidence for the clinical subdivision of anorexia nervosa. The psychophysiology of anxiety. A controlled comparison of relaxation and diazepam in panic disorder. The effects of viewing distance on fear of snakes. Habituation of the electrodermal orienting reaction is dependent on the cerebral hemisphere initially stimulated. Electrodermal responses in patients with unilateral brain damage. The comparative effectiveness of heart rate biofeedback, speech skills training, and a combination of both in treating public-speaking anxiety. Acute alcohol intoxication, negative affect, and autonomic arousal in women and men. Can different types of anxiety states be differentiated electrodermally? The seed and the soil: effect of dosage, personality and starting state on the response to delta 9 tetrahydrocannabinol in man. Effects of atmospheric electricity on some substrates of disordered social behavior. Identification of features associated with flying phobia in aircrew. Effects of rational-emotive therapy on psychophysiological and reported measures of test anxiety arousal. Conditional fear, anxiety, and morphine-seeking behavior. Epidemic faintness: a psychophysiological investigation. Psychophysiological responses of schizophrenic patients to high and low expressed emotion relatives. Habituation of physiological responses in anxiety. Skin conductance conditioning to potentially phobic stimuli as a function of interstimulus interval and delay versus trace paradigm. Psychophysiological effects of autogenic training and progressive relaxation. Effects of tolerance on the anxiety-reducing function of alcohol. Child abusers' responses to infant smiles and cries. Facial expressions of emotion as conditioned stimuli for human autonomic responses. The effects of nicotine and extraversion on self-report, skin conductance, electromyographic, and heart responses to emotional stimuli. Responses of chronic agoraphobics to subliminal and supraliminal phobic motion pictures. Expressive tendencies and physiological response to stress. Skin conductance as a function of alcohol during motor approach towards a noxious goal. The early identification of anxiety-laden material with the aid of skin conductance measurements. Arousal response predictions derived from ego psychology. Modeling processes in the acquisition of fears: vicarious electrodermal conditioning to fear-relevant stimuli. Nonverbal communication of affect in preschool in children: relationships with personality and skin conductance. An independence of induced amnesia and emotional response. Skin conductance and heart-rate responsivity to public speaking imagery among students with high and low self-reported fear: a comparative analysis of "response" definitions. Skin conductance recovery in antisocial adolescents. Interactions of marijuana and induced stress: forearm blood flow, heart rate, and skin conductance. Feedback of true heart rate during exposure in vivo. Partial replication with methodological improvement. Autonomic responses to modeled distress in prison psychopaths. Information about the model's unconditioned stimulus and response in vicarious classical conditioning. Effects of nonverbal dissimulation on emotional experience and autonomic arousal. Centrol and peripheral correlates of anxiety: a comparative study. Anxiety and the habituation of the skin conductance response. Defensive responses to phobic stimuli. Feedback of true heart rate during exposure in vivo. Decreased skin conductance response habituation in chronically anxious patients. Aversive situational effects on alpha feedback training. Heart rate and skin conductance in anticipation of shocks with varying probability of occurrence. Skin conductance responses to real and imagined snakes among avoidant and non-avoidant college students. Comparison of anxiety in thyrotoxic and neurotic patients using skin conductance measurements. Heart rate, skin conductance, and intensity ratings during experimentally induced anxiety: habituation within and among days. Heart rate and skin conductance during experimentally induced anxiety: the effect of uncertainty about receiving a noxious stimulus. Heart rate and skin conductance during experimentally induced anxiety: effects of anticipated intensity of noxious stimulation and experience. Intake-rejection, verbalization, and affect: effects on heart rate and skin conductance. Palmar skin conductance measures as predictors of response to desensitization. Palmar skin conductance measures in anxiety and phobic states. On the assessment of anxiety. IV. By measures of basal conductance and palmar sweat. Effects of morphine and pentobarbital on conditioned electrodermal responses and basal conductance in man. Test anxiety and skin conductance. Anxiety, skin conductance and alcohol; a study of the relation between anxiety and skin conductance and the effect of alcohol on the conductance of subjects in a group. The effect of alcoholic beverages on skin conductance and emotional tension. I. Wine, whisky and alcohol. 